It was in the year '95 that a combination of events, into which I
     need not enter, caused Mr. Sherlock Holmes and myself to spend some
     weeks in one of our great University towns, and it was during this
     time that the small but instructive adventure which I am about to
     relate befell us. It will be obvious that any details which would
     help the reader to exactly identify the college or the criminal would
     be injudicious and offensive. So painful a scandal may well be
     allowed to die out. With due discretion the incident itself may,
     however, be described, since it serves to illustrate some of those
     qualities for which my friend was remarkable. I will endeavour in my
     statement to avoid such terms as would serve to limit the events to
     any particular place, or give a clue as to the people concerned.




     We were residing at the time in furnished lodgings close to a library
     where Sherlock Holmes was pursuing some laborious researches in early
     English charters--researches which led to results so striking that
     they may be the subject of one of my future narratives. Here it was
     that one evening we received a visit from an acquaintance, Mr. Hilton
     Soames, tutor and lecturer at the College of St. Luke's. Mr. Soames
     was a tall, spare man, of a nervous and excitable temperament. I had
     always known him to be restless in his manner, but on this particular
     occasion he was in such a state of uncontrollable agitation that it
     was clear something very unusual had occurred.




     "I trust, Mr. Holmes, that you can spare me a few hours of your
     valuable time. We have had a very painful incident at St. Luke's, and
     really, but for the happy chance of your being in the town, I should
     have been at a loss what to do."




     "I am very busy just now, and I desire no distractions," my friend
     answered. "I should much prefer that you called in the aid of the
     police."




     "No, no, my dear sir; such a course is utterly impossible. When once
     the law is evoked it cannot be stayed again, and this is just one of
     those cases where, for the credit of the college, it is most
     essential to avoid scandal. Your discretion is as well known as your
     powers, and you are the one man in the world who can help me. I beg
     you, Mr. Holmes, to do what you can."




     My friend's temper had not improved since he had been deprived of the
     congenial surroundings of Baker Street. Without his scrap-books, his
     chemicals, and his homely untidiness, he was an uncomfortable man. He
     shrugged his shoulders in ungracious acquiescence, while our visitor
     in hurried words and with much excitable gesticulation poured forth
     his story.




     "I must explain to you, Mr. Holmes, that to-morrow is the first day
     of the examination for the Fortescue Scholarship. I am one of the
     examiners. My subject is Greek, and the first of the papers consists
     of a large passage of Greek translation which the candidate has not
     seen. This passage is printed on the examination paper, and it would
     naturally be an immense advantage if the candidate could prepare it
     in advance. For this reason great care is taken to keep the paper
     secret.




     "To-day about three o'clock the proofs of this paper arrived from the
     printers. The exercise consists of half a chapter of Thucydides. I
     had to read it over carefully, as the text must be absolutely
     correct. At four-thirty my task was not yet completed. I had,
     however, promised to take tea in a friend's rooms, so I left the
     proof upon my desk. I was absent rather more than an hour.




     "You are aware, Mr. Holmes, that our college doors are double--a
     green baize one within and a heavy oak one without. As I approached
     my outer door I was amazed to see a key in it. For an instant I
     imagined that I had left my own there, but on feeling in my pocket I
     found that it was all right. The only duplicate which existed, so far
     as I knew, was that which belonged to my servant, Bannister, a man
     who has looked after my room for ten years, and whose honesty is
     absolutely above suspicion. I found that the key was indeed his, that
     he had entered my room to know if I wanted tea, and that he had very
     carelessly left the key in the door when he came out. His visit to my
     room must have been within a very few minutes of my leaving it. His
     forgetfulness about the key would have mattered little upon any other
     occasion, but on this one day it has produced the most deplorable
     consequences.




     "The moment I looked at my table I was aware that someone had
     rummaged among my papers. The proof was in three long slips. I had
     left them all together. Now, I found that one of them was lying on
     the floor, one was on the side table near the window, and the third
     was where I had left it."




     Holmes stirred for the first time.




     "The first page on the floor, the second in the window, the third
     where you left it," said he.




     "Exactly, Mr. Holmes. You amaze me. How could you possibly know
     that?"




     "Pray continue your very interesting statement."




     "For an instant I imagined that Bannister had taken the unpardonable
     liberty of examining my papers. He denied it, however, with the
     utmost earnestness, and I am convinced that he was speaking the
     truth. The alternative was that someone passing had observed the key
     in the door, had known that I was out, and had entered to look at the
     papers. A large sum of money is at stake, for the scholarship is a
     very valuable one, and an unscrupulous man might very well run a risk
     in order to gain an advantage over his fellows.




     "Bannister was very much upset by the incident. He had nearly fainted
     when we found that the papers had undoubtedly been tampered with. I
     gave him a little brandy and left him collapsed in a chair while I
     made a most careful examination of the room. I soon saw that the
     intruder had left other traces of his presence besides the rumpled
     papers. On the table in the window were several shreds from a pencil
     which had been sharpened. A broken tip of lead was lying there also.
     Evidently the rascal had copied the paper in a great hurry, had
     broken his pencil, and had been compelled to put a fresh point to
     it."




     "Excellent!" said Holmes, who was recovering his good-humour as his
     attention became more engrossed by the case. "Fortune has been your
     friend."




     "This was not all. I have a new writing-table with a fine surface of
     red leather. I am prepared to swear, and so is Bannister, that it was
     smooth and unstained. Now I found a clean cut in it about three
     inches long--not a mere scratch, but a positive cut. Not only this,
     but on the table I found a small ball of black dough, or clay, with
     specks of something which looks like sawdust in it. I am convinced
     that these marks were left by the man who rifled the papers. There
     were no footmarks and no other evidence as to his identity. I was at
     my wits' ends, when suddenly the happy thought occurred to me that
     you were in the town, and I came straight round to put the matter
     into your hands. Do help me, Mr. Holmes! You see my dilemma. Either I
     must find the man or else the examination must be postponed until
     fresh papers are prepared, and since this cannot be done without
     explanation there will ensue a hideous scandal, which will throw a
     cloud not only on the college, but on the University. Above all
     things I desire to settle the matter quietly and discreetly."




     "I shall be happy to look into it and to give you such advice as I
     can," said Holmes, rising and putting on his overcoat. "The case is
     not entirely devoid of interest. Had anyone visited you in your room
     after the papers came to you?"




     "Yes; young Daulat Ras, an Indian student who lives on the same
     stair, came in to ask me some particulars about the examination."




     "For which he was entered?"




     "Yes."




     "And the papers were on your table?"




     "To the best of my belief they were rolled up."




     "But might be recognised as proofs?"




     "Possibly."




     "No one else in your room?"




     "No."




     "Did anyone know that these proofs would be there?"




     "No one save the printer."




     "Did this man Bannister know?"




     "No, certainly not. No one knew."




     "Where is Bannister now?"




     "He was very ill, poor fellow. I left him collapsed in the chair. I
     was in such a hurry to come to you."




     "You left your door open?"




     "I locked up the papers first."




     "Then it amounts to this, Mr. Soames, that unless the Indian student
     recognised the roll as being proofs, the man who tampered with them
     came upon them accidentally without knowing that they were there."




     "So it seems to me."




     Holmes gave an enigmatic smile.




     "Well," said he, "let us go round. Not one of your cases,
     Watson--mental, not physical. All right; come if you want to. Now,
     Mr. Soames--at your disposal!"




      The sitting-room of our client opened by a long, low, latticed
     window on to the ancient lichen-tinted court of the old college. A
     Gothic arched door led to a worn stone staircase. On the ground floor
     was the tutor's room. Above were three students, one on each story.
     It was already twilight when we reached the scene of our problem.
     Holmes halted and looked earnestly at the window. Then he approached
     it, and, standing on tiptoe with his neck craned, he looked into the
     room.




     "He must have entered through the door. There is no opening except
     the one pane," said our learned guide.




     "Dear me!" said Holmes, and he smiled in a singular way as he glanced
     at our companion. "Well, if there is nothing to be learned here we
     had best go inside."




     The lecturer unlocked the outer door and ushered us into his room. We
     stood at the entrance while Holmes made an examination of the carpet.




     "I am afraid there are no signs here," said he. "One could hardly
     hope for any upon so dry a day. Your servant seems to have quite
     recovered. You left him in a chair, you say; which chair?"




     "By the window there."




     "I see. Near this little table. You can come in now. I have finished
     with the carpet. Let us take the little table first. Of course, what
     has happened is very clear. The man entered and took the papers,
     sheet by sheet, from the central table. He carried them over to the
     window table, because from there he could see if you came across the
     courtyard, and so could effect an escape."




     "As a matter of fact he could not," said Soames, "for I entered by
     the side door."




     "Ah, that's good! Well, anyhow, that was in his mind. Let me see the
     three strips. No finger impressions--no! Well, he carried over this
     one first and he copied it. How long would it take him to do that,
     using every possible contraction? A quarter of an hour, not less.
     Then he tossed it down and seized the next. He was in the midst of
     that when your return caused him to make a very hurried retreat--very
     hurried, since he had not time to replace the papers which would tell
     you that he had been there. You were not aware of any hurrying feet
     on the stair as you entered the outer door?"




     "No, I can't say I was."




     "Well, he wrote so furiously that he broke his pencil, and had, as
     you observe, to sharpen it again. This is of interest, Watson. The
     pencil was not an ordinary one. It was above the usual size, with a
     soft lead; the outer colour was dark blue, the maker's name was
     printed in silver lettering, and the piece remaining is only about an
     inch and a half long. Look for such a pencil, Mr. Soames, and you
     have got your man. When I add that he possesses a large and very
     blunt knife, you have an additional aid."




     Mr. Soames was somewhat overwhelmed by this flood of information. "I
     can follow the other points," said he, "but really, in this matter of
     the length--"




     Holmes held out a small chip with the letters NN and a space of clear
     wood after them.




     "You see?"




     "No, I fear that even now--"




     "Watson, I have always done you an injustice. There are others. What
     could this NN be? It is at the end of a word. You are aware that
     Johann Faber is the most common maker's name. Is it not clear that
     there is just as much of the pencil left as usually follows the
     Johann?" He held the small table sideways to the electric light. "I
     was hoping that if the paper on which he wrote was thin some trace of
     it might come through upon this polished surface. No, I see nothing.
     I don't think there is anything more to be learned here. Now for the
     central table. This small pellet is, I presume, the black, doughy
     mass you spoke of. Roughly pyramidal in shape and hollowed out, I
     perceive. As you say, there appear to be grains of sawdust in it.
     Dear me, this is very interesting. And the cut--a positive tear, I
     see. It began with a thin scratch and ended in a jagged hole. I am
     much indebted to you for directing my attention to this case, Mr.
     Soames. Where does that door lead to?"




     "To my bedroom."




     "Have you been in it since your adventure?"




     "No; I came straight away for you."




     "I should like to have a glance round. What a charming, old-fashioned
     room! Perhaps you will kindly wait a minute until I have examined the
     floor. No, I see nothing. What about this curtain? You hang your
     clothes behind it. If anyone were forced to conceal himself in this
     room he must do it there, since the bed is too low and the wardrobe
     too shallow. No one there, I suppose?"




     As Holmes drew the curtain I was aware, from some little rigidity and
     alertness of his attitude, that he was prepared for an emergency. As
     a matter of fact the drawn curtain disclosed nothing but three or
     four suits of clothes hanging from a line of pegs. Holmes turned away
     and stooped suddenly to the floor.




     "Halloa! What's this?" said he.




     It was a small pyramid of black, putty-like stuff, exactly like the
     one upon the table of the study. Holmes held it out on his open palm
     in the glare of the electric light.




     "Your visitor seems to have left traces in your bedroom as well as in
     your sitting-room, Mr. Soames."




     "What could he have wanted there?"




     "I think it is clear enough. You came back by an unexpected way, and
     so he had no warning until you were at the very door. What could he
     do? He caught up everything which would betray him and he rushed into
     your bedroom to conceal himself."




     "Good gracious, Mr. Holmes, do you mean to tell me that all the time
     I was talking to Bannister in this room we had the man prisoner if we
     had only known it?"




     "So I read it."




     "Surely there is another alternative, Mr. Holmes. I don't know
     whether you observed my bedroom window?"




     "Lattice-paned, lead framework, three separate windows, one swinging
     on hinge and large enough to admit a man."




     "Exactly. And it looks out on an angle of the courtyard so as to be
     partly invisible. The man might have effected his entrance there,
     left traces as he passed through the bedroom, and, finally, finding
     the door open have escaped that way."




     Holmes shook his head impatiently.




     "Let us be practical," said he. "I understand you to say that there
     are three students who use this stair and are in the habit of passing
     your door?"




     "Yes, there are."




     "And they are all in for this examination?"




     "Yes."




     "Have you any reason to suspect any one of them more than the
     others?"




     Soames hesitated.




     "It is a very delicate question," said he. "One hardly likes to throw
     suspicion where there are no proofs."




     "Let us hear the suspicions. I will look after the proofs."




     "I will tell you, then, in a few words the character of the three men
     who inhabit these rooms. The lower of the three is Gilchrist, a fine
     scholar and athlete; plays in the Rugby team and the cricket team for
     the college, and got his Blue for the hurdles and the long jump. He
     is a fine, manly fellow. His father was the notorious Sir Jabez
     Gilchrist, who ruined himself on the turf. My scholar has been left
     very poor, but he is hard-working and industrious. He will do well.




     "The second floor is inhabited by Daulat Ras, the Indian. He is a
     quiet, inscrutable fellow, as most of those Indians are. He is well
     up in his work, though his Greek is his weak subject. He is steady
     and methodical.




     "The top floor belongs to Miles McLaren. He is a brilliant fellow
     when he chooses to work--one of the brightest intellects of the
     University, but he is wayward, dissipated, and unprincipled. He was
     nearly expelled over a card scandal in his first year. He has been
     idling all this term, and he must look forward with dread to the
     examination."




     "Then it is he whom you suspect?"




     "I dare not go so far as that. But of the three he is perhaps the
     least unlikely."




     "Exactly. Now, Mr. Soames, let us have a look at your servant,
     Bannister."




     He was a little, white-faced, clean-shaven, grizzly-haired fellow of
     fifty. He was still suffering from this sudden disturbance of the
     quiet routine of his life. His plump face was twitching with his
     nervousness, and his fingers could not keep still.




     "We are investigating this unhappy business, Bannister," said his
     master.




     "Yes, sir."




     "I understand," said Holmes, "that you left your key in the door?"




     "Yes, sir."




     "Was it not very extraordinary that you should do this on the very
     day when there were these papers inside?"




     "It was most unfortunate, sir. But I have occasionally done the same
     thing at other times."




     "When did you enter the room?"




     "It was about half-past four. That is Mr. Soames's tea time."




     "How long did you stay?"




     "When I saw that he was absent I withdrew at once."




     "Did you look at these papers on the table?"




     "No, sir; certainly not."




     "How came you to leave the key in the door?"




     "I had the tea-tray in my hand. I thought I would come back for the
     key. Then I forgot."




     "Has the outer door a spring lock?"




     "No, sir."




     "Then it was open all the time?"




     "Yes, sir."




     "Anyone in the room could get out?"




     "Yes, sir."




     "When Mr. Soames returned and called for you, you were very much
     disturbed?"




     "Yes, sir. Such a thing has never happened during the many years that
     I have been here. I nearly fainted, sir."




     "So I understand. Where were you when you began to feel bad?"




     "Where was I, sir? Why, here, near the door."




     "That is singular, because you sat down in that chair over yonder
     near the corner. Why did you pass these other chairs?"




     "I don't know, sir. It didn't matter to me where I sat."




     "I really don't think he knew much about it, Mr. Holmes. He was
     looking very bad--quite ghastly."




     "You stayed here when your master left?"




     "Only for a minute or so. Then I locked the door and went to my
     room."




     "Whom do you suspect?"




     "Oh, I would not venture to say, sir. I don't believe there is any
     gentleman in this University who is capable of profiting by such an
     action. No, sir, I'll not believe it."




     "Thank you; that will do," said Holmes. "Oh, one more word. You have
     not mentioned to any of the three gentlemen whom you attend that
     anything is amiss?"




     "No, sir; not a word."




     "You haven't seen any of them?"




     "No, sir."




     "Very good. Now, Mr. Soames, we will take a walk in the quadrangle,
     if you please."




     Three yellow squares of light shone above us in the gathering gloom.




     "Your three birds are all in their nests," said Holmes, looking up.
     "Halloa! What's that? One of them seems restless enough."




     It was the Indian, whose dark silhouette appeared suddenly upon his
     blind. He was pacing swiftly up and down his room.




     "I should like to have a peep at each of them," said Holmes. "Is it
     possible?"




     "No difficulty in the world," Soames answered. "This set of rooms is
     quite the oldest in the college, and it is not unusual for visitors
     to go over them. Come along, and I will personally conduct you."




     "No names, please!" said Holmes, as we knocked at Gilchrist's door. A
     tall, flaxen-haired, slim young fellow opened it, and made us welcome
     when he understood our errand. There were some really curious pieces
     of mediaeval domestic architecture within. Holmes was so charmed with
     one of them that he insisted on drawing it on his note-book, broke
     his pencil, had to borrow one from our host, and finally borrowed a
     knife to sharpen his own. The same curious accident happened to him
     in the rooms of the Indian--a silent, little, hook-nosed fellow, who
     eyed us askance and was obviously glad when Holmes's architectural
     studies had come to an end. I could not see that in either case
     Holmes had come upon the clue for which he was searching. Only at the
     third did our visit prove abortive. The outer door would not open to
     our knock, and nothing more substantial than a torrent of bad
     language came from behind it. "I don't care who you are. You can go
     to blazes!" roared the angry voice. "To-morrow's the exam, and I
     won't be drawn by anyone."




     "A rude fellow," said our guide, flushing with anger as we withdrew
     down the stair. "Of course, he did not realize that it was I who was
     knocking, but none the less his conduct was very uncourteous, and,
     indeed, under the circumstances rather suspicious."




     Holmes's response was a curious one.




     "Can you tell me his exact height?" he asked.




     "Really, Mr. Holmes, I cannot undertake to say. He is taller than the
     Indian, not so tall as Gilchrist. I suppose five foot six would be
     about it."




     "That is very important," said Holmes. "And now, Mr. Soames, I wish
     you good-night."




     Our guide cried aloud in his astonishment and dismay. "Good gracious,
     Mr. Holmes, you are surely not going to leave me in this abrupt
     fashion! You don't seem to realize the position. To-morrow is the
     examination. I must take some definite action to-night. I cannot
     allow the examination to be held if one of the papers has been
     tampered with. The situation must be faced."




     "You must leave it as it is. I shall drop round early to-morrow
     morning and chat the matter over. It is possible that I may be in a
     position then to indicate some course of action. Meanwhile you change
     nothing--nothing at all."




     "Very good, Mr. Holmes."




     "You can be perfectly easy in your mind. We shall certainly find some
     way out of your difficulties. I will take the black clay with me,
     also the pencil cuttings. Good-bye."




     When we were out in the darkness of the quadrangle we again looked up
     at the windows. The Indian still paced his room. The others were
     invisible.




     "Well, Watson, what do you think of it?" Holmes asked, as we came out
     into the main street. "Quite a little parlour game--sort of
     three-card trick, is it not? There are your three men. It must be one
     of them. You take your choice. Which is yours?"




     "The foul-mouthed fellow at the top. He is the one with the worst
     record. And yet that Indian was a sly fellow also. Why should he be
     pacing his room all the time?"




     "There is nothing in that. Many men do it when they are trying to
     learn anything by heart."




     "He looked at us in a queer way."




     "So would you if a flock of strangers came in on you when you were
     preparing for an examination next day, and every moment was of value.
     No, I see nothing in that. Pencils, too, and knives--all was
     satisfactory. But that fellow does puzzle me."




     "Who?"




     "Why, Bannister, the servant. What's his game in the matter?"




     "He impressed me as being a perfectly honest man."




     "So he did me. That's the puzzling part. Why should a perfectly
     honest man--well, well, here's a large stationer's. We shall begin
     our researches here."




     There were only four stationers of any consequence in the town, and
     at each Holmes produced his pencil chips and bid high for a
     duplicate. All were agreed that one could be ordered, but that it was
     not a usual size of pencil and that it was seldom kept in stock. My
     friend did not appear to be depressed by his failure, but shrugged
     his shoulders in half-humorous resignation.




     "No good, my dear Watson. This, the best and only final clue, has run
     to nothing. But, indeed, I have little doubt that we can build up a
     sufficient case without it. By Jove! my dear fellow, it is nearly
     nine, and the landlady babbled of green peas at seven-thirty. What
     with your eternal tobacco, Watson, and your irregularity at meals, I
     expect that you will get notice to quit and that I shall share your
     downfall--not, however, before we have solved the problem of the
     nervous tutor, the careless servant, and the three enterprising
     students."




      Holmes made no further allusion to the matter that day, though he
     sat lost in thought for a long time after our belated dinner. At
     eight in the morning he came into my room just as I finished my
     toilet.




     "Well, Watson," said he, "it is time we went down to St. Luke's. Can
     you do without breakfast?"




     "Certainly."




     "Soames will be in a dreadful fidget until we are able to tell him
     something positive."




     "Have you anything positive to tell him?"




     "I think so."




     "You have formed a conclusion?"




     "Yes, my dear Watson; I have solved the mystery."




     "But what fresh evidence could you have got?"




     "Aha! It is not for nothing that I have turned myself out of bed at
     the untimely hour of six. I have put in two hours' hard work and
     covered at least five miles, with something to show for it. Look at
     that!"




     He held out his hand. On the palm were three little pyramids of
     black, doughy clay.




     "Why, Holmes, you had only two yesterday!"




     "And one more this morning. It is a fair argument that wherever No. 3
     came from is also the source of Nos. 1 and 2. Eh, Watson? Well, come
     along and put friend Soames out of his pain."




      The unfortunate tutor was certainly in a state of pitiable agitation
     when we found him in his chambers. In a few hours the examination
     would commence, and he was still in the dilemma between making the
     facts public and allowing the culprit to compete for the valuable
     scholarship. He could hardly stand still, so great was his mental
     agitation, and he ran towards Holmes with two eager hands
     outstretched.




     "Thank Heaven that you have come! I feared that you had given it up
     in despair. What am I to do? Shall the examination proceed?"




     "Yes; let it proceed by all means."




     "But this rascal--?"




     "He shall not compete."




     "You know him?"




     "I think so. If this matter is not to become public we must give
     ourselves certain powers, and resolve ourselves into a small private
     court-martial. You there, if you please, Soames! Watson, you here!
     I'll take the arm-chair in the middle. I think that we are now
     sufficiently imposing to strike terror into a guilty breast. Kindly
     ring the bell!"




     Bannister entered, and shrunk back in evident surprise and fear at
     our judicial appearance.




     "You will kindly close the door," said Holmes. "Now, Bannister, will
     you please tell us the truth about yesterday's incident?"




     The man turned white to the roots of his hair.




     "I have told you everything, sir."




     "Nothing to add?"




     "Nothing at all, sir."




     "Well, then, I must make some suggestions to you. When you sat down
     on that chair yesterday, did you do so in order to conceal some
     object which would have shown who had been in the room?"




     Bannister's face was ghastly.




     "No, sir; certainly not."




     "It is only a suggestion," said Holmes, suavely. "I frankly admit
     that I am unable to prove it. But it seems probable enough, since the
     moment that Mr. Soames's back was turned you released the man who was
     hiding in that bedroom."




     Bannister licked his dry lips.




     "There was no man, sir."




     "Ah, that's a pity, Bannister. Up to now you may have spoken the
     truth, but now I know that you have lied."




     The man's face set in sullen defiance.




     "There was no man, sir."




     "Come, come, Bannister!"




     "No, sir; there was no one."




     "In that case you can give us no further information. Would you
     please remain in the room? Stand over there near the bedroom door.
     Now, Soames, I am going to ask you to have the great kindness to go
     up to the room of young Gilchrist, and to ask him to step down into
     yours."




     An instant later the tutor returned, bringing with him the student.
     He was a fine figure of a man, tall, lithe, and agile, with a springy
     step and a pleasant, open face. His troubled blue eyes glanced at
     each of us, and finally rested with an expression of blank dismay
     upon Bannister in the farther corner.




     "Just close the door," said Holmes. "Now, Mr. Gilchrist, we are all
     quite alone here, and no one need ever know one word of what passes
     between us. We can be perfectly frank with each other. We want to
     know, Mr. Gilchrist, how you, an honourable man, ever came to commit
     such an action as that of yesterday?"




     The unfortunate young man staggered back and cast a look full of
     horror and reproach at Bannister.




     "No, no, Mr. Gilchrist, sir; I never said a word--never one word!"
     cried the servant.




     "No, but you have now," said Holmes. "Now, sir, you must see that
     after Bannister's words your position is hopeless, and that your only
     chance lies in a frank confession."




     For a moment Gilchrist, with upraised hand, tried to control his
     writhing features. The next he had thrown himself on his knees beside
     the table and, burying his face in his hands, he had burst into a
     storm of passionate sobbing.




     "Come, come," said Holmes, kindly; "it is human to err, and at least
     no one can accuse you of being a callous criminal. Perhaps it would
     be easier for you if I were to tell Mr. Soames what occurred, and you
     can check me where I am wrong. Shall I do so? Well, well, don't
     trouble to answer. Listen, and see that I do you no injustice.




     "From the moment, Mr. Soames, that you said to me that no one, not
     even Bannister, could have told that the papers were in your room,
     the case began to take a definite shape in my mind. The printer one
     could, of course, dismiss. He could examine the papers in his own
     office. The Indian I also thought nothing of. If the proofs were in a
     roll he could not possibly know what they were. On the other hand, it
     seemed an unthinkable coincidence that a man should dare to enter the
     room, and that by chance on that very day the papers were on the
     table. I dismissed that. The man who entered knew that the papers
     were there. How did he know?




     "When I approached your room I examined the window. You amused me by
     supposing that I was contemplating the possibility of someone having
     in broad daylight, under the eyes of all these opposite rooms, forced
     himself through it. Such an idea was absurd. I was measuring how tall
     a man would need to be in order to see as he passed what papers were
     on the central table. I am six feet high, and I could do it with an
     effort. No one less than that would have a chance. Already you see I
     had reason to think that if one of your three students was a man of
     unusual height he was the most worth watching of the three.




     "I entered and I took you into my confidence as to the suggestions of
     the side table. Of the centre table I could make nothing, until in
     your description of Gilchrist you mentioned that he was a
     long-distance jumper. Then the whole thing came to me in an instant,
     and I only needed certain corroborative proofs, which I speedily
     obtained.




     "What happened was this. This young fellow had employed his afternoon
     at the athletic grounds, where he had been practising the jump. He
     returned carrying his jumping shoes, which are provided, as you are
     aware, with several sharp spikes. As he passed your window he saw, by
     means of his great height, these proofs upon your table, and
     conjectured what they were. No harm would have been done had it not
     been that as he passed your door he perceived the key which had been
     left by the carelessness of your servant. A sudden impulse came over
     him to enter and see if they were indeed the proofs. It was not a
     dangerous exploit, for he could always pretend that he had simply
     looked in to ask a question.




     "Well, when he saw that they were indeed the proofs, it was then that
     he yielded to temptation. He put his shoes on the table. What was it
     you put on that chair near the window?"




     "Gloves," said the young man.




     Holmes looked triumphantly at Bannister. "He put his gloves on the
     chair, and he took the proofs, sheet by sheet, to copy them. He
     thought the tutor must return by the main gate, and that he would see
     him. As we know, he came back by the side gate. Suddenly he heard him
     at the very door. There was no possible escape. He forgot his gloves,
     but he caught up his shoes and darted into the bedroom. You observe
     that the scratch on that table is slight at one side, but deepens in
     the direction of the bedroom door. That in itself is enough to show
     us that the shoe had been drawn in that direction and that the
     culprit had taken refuge there. The earth round the spike had been
     left on the table, and a second sample was loosened and fell in the
     bedroom. I may add that I walked out to the athletic grounds this
     morning, saw that tenacious black clay is used in the jumping-pit,
     and carried away a specimen of it, together with some of the fine tan
     or sawdust which is strewn over it to prevent the athlete from
     slipping. Have I told the truth, Mr. Gilchrist?"




     The student had drawn himself erect.




     "Yes, sir, it is true," said he.




     "Good heavens, have you nothing to add?" cried Soames.




     "Yes, sir, I have, but the shock of this disgraceful exposure has
     bewildered me. I have a letter here, Mr. Soames, which I wrote to you
     early this morning in the middle of a restless night. It was before I
     knew that my sin had found me out. Here it is, sir. You will see that
     I have said, 'I have determined not to go in for the examination. I
     have been offered a commission in the Rhodesian Police, and I am
     going out to South Africa at once.'"




     "I am indeed pleased to hear that you did not intend to profit by
     your unfair advantage," said Soames. "But why did you change your
     purpose?"




     Gilchrist pointed to Bannister.




     "There is the man who set me in the right path," said he.




     "Come now, Bannister," said Holmes. "It will be clear to you from
     what I have said that only you could have let this young man out,
     since you were left in the room, and must have locked the door when
     you went out. As to his escaping by that window, it was incredible.
     Can you not clear up the last point in this mystery, and tell us the
     reasons for your action?"




     "It was simple enough, sir, if you only had known; but with all your
     cleverness it was impossible that you could know. Time was, sir, when
     I was butler to old Sir Jabez Gilchrist, this young gentleman's
     father. When he was ruined I came to the college as servant, but I
     never forgot my old employer because he was down in the world. I
     watched his son all I could for the sake of the old days. Well, sir,
     when I came into this room yesterday when the alarm was given, the
     very first thing I saw was Mr. Gilchrist's tan gloves a-lying in that
     chair. I knew those gloves well, and I understood their message. If
     Mr. Soames saw them the game was up. I flopped down into that chair,
     and nothing would budge me until Mr. Soames he went for you. Then out
     came my poor young master, whom I had dandled on my knee, and
     confessed it all to me. Wasn't it natural, sir, that I should save
     him, and wasn't it natural also that I should try to speak to him as
     his dead father would have done, and make him understand that he
     could not profit by such a deed? Could you blame me, sir?"




     "No, indeed," said Holmes, heartily, springing to his feet. "Well,
     Soames, I think we have cleared your little problem up, and our
     breakfast awaits us at home. Come, Watson! As to you, sir, I trust
     that a bright future awaits you in Rhodesia. For once you have fallen
     low. Let us see in the future how high you can rise."




    We have had some dramatic entrances and exits upon our small stage at
     Baker Street, but I cannot recollect anything more sudden and
     startling than the first appearance of Thorneycroft Huxtable, M.A.,
     Ph.D., etc. His card, which seemed too small to carry the weight of
     his academic distinctions, preceded him by a few seconds, and then he
     entered himself--so large, so pompous, and so dignified that he was
     the very embodiment of self-possession and solidity. And yet his
     first action when the door had closed behind him was to stagger
     against the table, whence he slipped down upon the floor, and there
     was that majestic figure prostrate and insensible upon our bearskin
     hearthrug.


     We had sprung to our feet, and for a few moments we stared in silent
     amazement at this ponderous piece of wreckage, which told of some
     sudden and fatal storm far out on the ocean of life. Then Holmes
     hurried with a cushion for his head and I with brandy for his lips.
     The heavy white face was seamed with lines of trouble, the hanging
     pouches under the closed eyes were leaden in colour, the loose mouth
     drooped dolorously at the corners, the rolling chins were unshaven.
     Collar and shirt bore the grime of a long journey, and the hair
     bristled unkempt from the well-shaped head. It was a sorely-stricken
     man who lay before us.


     "What is it, Watson?" asked Holmes.


     "Absolute exhaustion--possibly mere hunger and fatigue," said I, with
     my finger on the thready pulse, where the stream of life trickled
     thin and small.


     "Return ticket from Mackleton, in the North of England," said Holmes,
     drawing it from the watch-pocket. "It is not twelve o'clock yet. He
     has certainly been an early starter."


     The puckered eyelids had begun to quiver, and now a pair of vacant,
     grey eyes looked up at us. An instant later the man had scrambled on
     to his feet, his face crimson with shame.


     "Forgive this weakness, Mr. Holmes; I have been a little overwrought.
     Thank you, if I might have a glass of milk and a biscuit I have no
     doubt that I should be better. I came personally, Mr. Holmes, in
     order to ensure that you would return with me. I feared that no
     telegram would convince you of the absolute urgency of the case."


     "When you are quite restored--


     "I am quite well again. I cannot imagine how I came to be so weak. I
     wish you, Mr. Holmes, to come to Mackleton with me by the next
     train."


     My friend shook his head.


     "My colleague, Dr. Watson, could tell you that we are very busy at
     present. I am retained in this case of the Ferrers Documents, and the
     Abergavenny murder is coming up for trial. Only a very important
     issue could call me from London at present."


     "Important!" Our visitor threw up his hands. "Have you heard nothing
     of the abduction of the only son of the Duke of Holdernesse?"


     "What! the late Cabinet Minister?"


     "Exactly. We had tried to keep it out of the papers, but there was
     some rumour in the Globe last night. I thought it might have reached
     your ears."


     Holmes shot out his long, thin arm and picked out Volume "H" in his
     encyclopaedia of reference.


     "'Holdernesse, 6th Duke, K.G., P.C.'--half the alphabet! 'Baron
     Beverley, Earl of Carston'--dear me, what a list! 'Lord Lieutenant of
     Hallamshire since 1900. Married Edith, daughter of Sir Charles
     Appledore, 1888. Heir and only child, Lord Saltire. Owns about two
     hundred and fifty thousand acres. Minerals in Lancashire and Wales.
     Address: Carlton House Terrace; Holdernesse Hall, Hallamshire;
     Carston Castle, Bangor, Wales. Lord of the Admiralty, 1872; Chief
     Secretary of State for--' Well, well, this man is certainly one of
     the greatest subjects of the Crown!"


     "The greatest and perhaps the wealthiest. I am aware, Mr. Holmes,
     that you take a very high line in professional matters, and that you
     are prepared to work for the work's sake. I may tell you, however,
     that his Grace has already intimated that a cheque for five thousand
     pounds will be handed over to the person who can tell him where his
     son is, and another thousand to him who can name the man, or men, who
     have taken him."


     "It is a princely offer," said Holmes. "Watson, I think that we shall
     accompany Dr. Huxtable back to the North of England. And now, Dr.
     Huxtable, when you have consumed that milk you will kindly tell me
     what has happened, when it happened, how it happened, and, finally,
     what Dr. Thorneycroft Huxtable, of the Priory School, near Mackleton,
     has to do with the matter, and why he comes three days after an
     event--the state of your chin gives the date--to ask for my humble
     services."


     Our visitor had consumed his milk and biscuits. The light had come
     back to his eyes and the colour to his cheeks as he set himself with
     great vigour and lucidity to explain the situation.


     "I must inform you, gentlemen, that the Priory is a preparatory
     school, of which I am the founder and principal. 'Huxtable's
     Sidelights on Horace' may possibly recall my name to your memories.
     The Priory is, without exception, the best and most select
     preparatory school in England. Lord Leverstoke, the Earl of
     Blackwater, Sir Cathcart Soames--they all have entrusted their sons
     to me. But I felt that my school had reached its zenith when, three
     weeks ago, the Duke of Holdernesse sent Mr. James Wilder, his
     secretary, with the intimation that young Lord Saltire, ten years
     old, his only son and heir, was about to be committed to my charge.
     Little did I think that this would be the prelude to the most
     crushing misfortune of my life.


     "On May 1st the boy arrived, that being the beginning of the summer
     term. He was a charming youth, and he soon fell into our ways. I may
     tell you--I trust that I am not indiscreet, but half-confidences are
     absurd in such a case--that he was not entirely happy at home. It is
     an open secret that the Duke's married life had not been a peaceful
     one, and the matter had ended in a separation by mutual consent, the
     Duchess taking up her residence in the South of France. This had
     occurred very shortly before, and the boy's sympathies are known to
     have been strongly with his mother. He moped after her departure from
     Holdernesse Hall, and it was for this reason that the Duke desired to
     send him to my establishment. In a fortnight the boy was quite at
     home with us, and was apparently absolutely happy.


     "He was last seen on the night of May 13th--that is, the night of
     last Monday. His room was on the second floor, and was approached
     through another larger room in which two boys were sleeping. These
     boys saw and heard nothing, so that it is certain that young Saltire
     did not pass out that way. His window was open, and there is a stout
     ivy plant leading to the ground. We could trace no footmarks below,
     but it is sure that this is the only possible exit.


     "His absence was discovered at seven o'clock on Tuesday morning. His
     bed had been slept in. He had dressed himself fully before going off
     in his usual school suit of black Eton jacket and dark grey trousers.
     There were no signs that anyone had entered the room, and it is quite
     certain that anything in the nature of cries, or a struggle, would
     have been heard, since Caunter, the elder boy in the inner room, is a
     very light sleeper.


     "When Lord Saltire's disappearance was discovered I at once called a
     roll of the whole establishment, boys, masters, and servants. It was
     then that we ascertained that Lord Saltire had not been alone in his
     flight. Heidegger, the German master, was missing. His room was on
     the second floor, at the farther end of the building, facing the same
     way as Lord Saltire's. His bed had also been slept in; but he had
     apparently gone away partly dressed, since his shirt and socks were
     lying on the floor. He had undoubtedly let himself down by the ivy,
     for we could see the marks of his feet where he had landed on the
     lawn. His bicycle was kept in a small shed beside this lawn, and it
     also was gone.


     "He had been with me for two years, and came with the best
     references; but he was a silent, morose man, not very popular either
     with masters or boys. No trace could be found of the fugitives, and
     now on Thursday morning we are as ignorant as we were on Tuesday.
     Inquiry was, of course, made at once at Holdernesse Hall. It is only
     a few miles away, and we imagined that in some sudden attack of
     home-sickness he had gone back to his father; but nothing had been
     heard of him. The Duke is greatly agitated--and as to me, you have
     seen yourselves the state of nervous prostration to which the
     suspense and the responsibility have reduced me. Mr. Holmes, if ever
     you put forward your full powers, I implore you to do so now, for
     never in your life could you have a case which is more worthy of
     them."


     Sherlock Holmes had listened with the utmost intentness to the
     statement of the unhappy schoolmaster. His drawn brows and the deep
     furrow between them showed that he needed no exhortation to
     concentrate all his attention upon a problem which, apart from the
     tremendous interests involved, must appeal so directly to his love of
     the complex and the unusual. He now drew out his note-book and jotted
     down one or two memoranda.


     "You have been very remiss in not coming to me sooner," said he,
     severely. "You start me on my investigation with a very serious
     handicap. It is inconceivable, for example, that this ivy and this
     lawn would have yielded nothing to an expert observer."


     "I am not to blame, Mr. Holmes. His Grace was extremely desirous to
     avoid all public scandal. He was afraid of his family unhappiness
     being dragged before the world. He has a deep horror of anything of
     the kind."


     "But there has been some official investigation?"


     "Yes, sir, and it has proved most disappointing. An apparent clue was
     at once obtained, since a boy and a young man were reported to have
     been seen leaving a neighbouring station by an early train. Only last
     night we had news that the couple had been hunted down in Liverpool,
     and they prove to have no connection whatever with the matter in
     hand. Then it was that in my despair and disappointment, after a
     sleepless night, I came straight to you by the early train."


     "I suppose the local investigation was relaxed while this false clue
     was being followed up?"


     "It was entirely dropped."


     "So that three days have been wasted. The affair has been most
     deplorably handled."


     "I feel it, and admit it."


     "And yet the problem should be capable of ultimate solution. I shall
     be very happy to look into it. Have you been able to trace any
     connection between the missing boy and this German master?"


     "None at all."


     "Was he in the master's class?"


     "No; he never exchanged a word with him so far as I know."


     "That is certainly very singular. Had the boy a bicycle?"


     "No."


     "Was any other bicycle missing?"


     "No."


     "Is that certain?"


     "Quite."


     "Well, now, you do not mean to seriously suggest that this German
     rode off upon a bicycle in the dead of the night bearing the boy in
     his arms?"


     "Certainly not."


     "Then what is the theory in your mind?"


     "The bicycle may have been a blind. It may have been hidden somewhere
     and the pair gone off on foot."


     "Quite so; but it seems rather an absurd blind, does it not? Were
     there other bicycles in this shed?"


     "Several."


     "Would he not have hidden a couple he desired to give the idea that
     they had gone off upon them?"


     "I suppose he would."


     "Of course he would. The blind theory won't do. But the incident is
     an admirable starting-point for an investigation. After all, a
     bicycle is not an easy thing to conceal or to destroy. One other
     question. Did anyone call to see the boy on the day before he
     disappeared?"


     "No."


     "Did he get any letters?"


     "Yes; one letter."


     "From whom?"


     "From his father."


     "Do you open the boys' letters?"


     "No."


     "How do you know it was from the father?"


     "The coat of arms was on the envelope, and it was addressed in the
     Duke's peculiar stiff hand. Besides, the Duke remembers having
     written."


     "When had he a letter before that?"


     "Not for several days."


     "Had he ever one from France?"


     "No; never."


     "You see the point of my questions, of course. Either the boy was
     carried off by force or he went of his own free will. In the latter
     case you would expect that some prompting from outside would be
     needed to make so young a lad do such a thing. If he has had no
     visitors, that prompting must have come in letters. Hence I try to
     find out who were his correspondents."


     "I fear I cannot help you much. His only correspondent, so far as I
     know, was his own father."


     "Who wrote to him on the very day of his disappearance. Were the
     relations between father and son very friendly?"


     "His Grace is never very friendly with anyone. He is completely
     immersed in large public questions, and is rather inaccessible to all
     ordinary emotions. But he was always kind to the boy in his own way."


     "But the sympathies of the latter were with the mother?"


     "Yes."


     "Did he say so?"


     "No."


     "The Duke, then?"


     "Good heavens, no!"


     "Then how could you know?"


     "I have had some confidential talks with Mr. James Wilder, his
     Grace's secretary. It was he who gave me the information about Lord
     Saltire's feelings."


     "I see. By the way, that last letter of the Duke's--was it found in
     the boy's room after he was gone?"


     "No; he had taken it with him. I think, Mr. Holmes, it is time that
     we were leaving for Euston."


     "I will order a four-wheeler. In a quarter of an hour we shall be at
     your service. If you are telegraphing home, Mr. Huxtable, it would be
     well to allow the people in your neighbourhood to imagine that the
     inquiry is still going on in Liverpool, or wherever else that red
     herring led your pack. In the meantime I will do a little quiet work
     at your own doors, and perhaps the scent is not so cold but that two
     old hounds like Watson and myself may get a sniff of it."


     That evening found us in the cold, bracing atmosphere of the Peak
     country, in which Dr. Huxtable's famous school is situated. It was
     already dark when we reached it. A card was lying on the hall table,
     and the butler whispered something to his master, who turned to us
     with agitation in every heavy feature.


     "The Duke is here," said he. "The Duke and Mr. Wilder are in the
     study. Come, gentlemen, and I will introduce you."


     I was, of course, familiar with the pictures of the famous statesman,
     but the man himself was very different from his representation. He
     was a tall and stately person, scrupulously dressed, with a drawn,
     thin face, and a nose which was grotesquely curved and long. His
     complexion was of a dead pallor, which was more startling by contrast
     with a long, dwindling beard of vivid red, which flowed down over his
     white waistcoat, with his watch-chain gleaming through its fringe.
     Such was the stately presence who looked stonily at us from the
     centre of Dr. Huxtable's hearthrug. Beside him stood a very young
     man, whom I understood to be Wilder, the private secretary. He was
     small, nervous, alert, with intelligent, light-blue eyes and mobile
     features. It was he who at once, in an incisive and positive tone,
     opened the conversation.


     "I called this morning, Dr. Huxtable, too late to prevent you from
     starting for London. I learned that your object was to invite Mr.
     Sherlock Holmes to undertake the conduct of this case. His Grace is
     surprised, Dr. Huxtable, that you should have taken such a step
     without consulting him."


     "When I learned that the police had failed--"


     "His Grace is by no means convinced that the police have failed."


     "But surely, Mr. Wilder--"


     "You are well aware, Dr. Huxtable, that his Grace is particularly
     anxious to avoid all public scandal. He prefers to take as few people
     as possible into his confidence."


     "The matter can be easily remedied," said the brow-beaten doctor;
     "Mr. Sherlock Holmes can return to London by the morning train."


     "Hardly that, Doctor, hardly that," said Holmes, in his blandest
     voice. "This northern air is invigorating and pleasant, so I propose
     to spend a few days upon your moors, and to occupy my mind as best I
     may. Whether I have the shelter of your roof or of the village inn
     is, of course, for you to decide."


     I could see that the unfortunate doctor was in the last stage of
     indecision, from which he was rescued by the deep, sonorous voice of
     the red-bearded Duke, which boomed out like a dinner-gong.


     "I agree with Mr. Wilder, Dr. Huxtable, that you would have done
     wisely to consult me. But since Mr. Holmes has already been taken
     into your confidence, it would indeed be absurd that we should not
     avail ourselves of his services. Far from going to the inn, Mr.
     Holmes, I should be pleased if you would come and stay with me at
     Holdernesse Hall."


     "I thank your Grace. For the purposes of my investigation I think
     that it would be wiser for me to remain at the scene of the mystery."


     "Just as you like, Mr. Holmes. Any information which Mr. Wilder or I
     can give you is, of course, at your disposal."


     "It will probably be necessary for me to see you at the Hall," said
     Holmes. "I would only ask you now, sir, whether you have formed any
     explanation in your own mind as to the mysterious disappearance of
     your son?"


     "No, sir, I have not."


     "Excuse me if I allude to that which is painful to you, but I have no
     alternative. Do you think that the Duchess had anything to do with
     the matter?"


     The great Minister showed perceptible hesitation.


     "I do not think so," he said, at last.


     "The other most obvious explanation is that the child has been
     kidnapped for the purpose of levying ransom. You have not had any
     demand of the sort?"


     "No, sir."


     "One more question, your Grace. I understand that you wrote to your
     son upon the day when this incident occurred."


     "No; I wrote upon the day before."


     "Exactly. But he received it on that day?"


     "Yes."


     "Was there anything in your letter which might have unbalanced him or
     induced him to take such a step?"


     "No, sir, certainly not."


     "Did you post that letter yourself?"


     The nobleman's reply was interrupted by his secretary, who broke in
     with some heat.


     "His Grace is not in the habit of posting letters himself," said he.
     "This letter was laid with others upon the study table, and I myself
     put them in the post-bag."


     "You are sure this one was among them?"


     "Yes; I observed it."


     "How many letters did your Grace write that day?"


     "Twenty or thirty. I have a large correspondence. But surely this is
     somewhat irrelevant?"


     "Not entirely," said Holmes.


     "For my own part," the Duke continued, "I have advised the police to
     turn their attention to the South of France. I have already said that
     I do not believe that the Duchess would encourage so monstrous an
     action, but the lad had the most wrong-headed opinions, and it is
     possible that he may have fled to her, aided and abetted by this
     German. I think, Dr. Huxtable, that we will now return to the Hall."


     I could see that there were other questions which Holmes would have
     wished to put; but the nobleman's abrupt manner showed that the
     interview was at an end. It was evident that to his intensely
     aristocratic nature this discussion of his intimate family affairs
     with a stranger was most abhorrent, and that he feared lest every
     fresh question would throw a fiercer light into the discreetly
     shadowed corners of his ducal history.


     When the nobleman and his secretary had left, my friend flung himself
     at once with characteristic eagerness into the investigation.


     The boy's chamber was carefully examined, and yielded nothing save
     the absolute conviction that it was only through the window that he
     could have escaped. The German master's room and effects gave no
     further clue. In his case a trailer of ivy had given way under his
     weight, and we saw by the light of a lantern the mark on the lawn
     where his heels had come down. That one dint in the short green grass
     was the only material witness left of this inexplicable nocturnal
     flight.


     Sherlock Holmes left the house alone, and only returned after eleven.
     He had obtained a large ordnance map of the neighbourhood, and this
     he brought into my room, where he laid it out on the bed, and, having
     balanced the lamp in the middle of it, he began to smoke over it, and
     occasionally to point out objects of interest with the reeking amber
     of his pipe.


     "This case grows upon me, Watson," said he. "There are decidedly some
     points of interest in connection with it. In this early stage I want
     you to realize those geographical features which may have a good deal
     to do with our investigation.


     "Look at this map. This dark square is the Priory School. I'll put a
     pin in it. Now, this line is the main road. You see that it runs east
     and west past the school, and you see also that there is no side road
     for a mile either way. If these two folk passed away by road it was
     this road."


     [ Picture: Chart of the surrounding area ]


     "Exactly."


     "By a singular and happy chance we are able to some extent to check
     what passed along this road during the night in question. At this
     point, where my pipe is now resting, a country constable was on duty
     from twelve to six. It is, as you perceive, the first cross road on
     the east side. This man declares that he was not absent from his post
     for an instant, and he is positive that neither boy nor man could
     have gone that way unseen. I have spoken with this policeman
     to-night, and he appears to me to be a perfectly reliable person.
     That blocks this end. We have now to deal with the other. There is an
     inn here, the Red Bull, the landlady of which was ill. She had sent
     to Mackleton for a doctor, but he did not arrive until morning, being
     absent at another case. The people at the inn were alert all night,
     awaiting his coming, and one or other of them seems to have
     continually had an eye upon the road. They declare that no one
     passed. If their evidence is good, then we are fortunate enough to be
     able to block the west, and also to be able to say that the fugitives
     did not use the road at all."


     "But the bicycle?" I objected.


     "Quite so. We will come to the bicycle presently. To continue our
     reasoning: if these people did not go by the road, they must have
     traversed the country to the north of the house or to the south of
     the house. That is certain. Let us weigh the one against the other.
     On the south of the house is, as you perceive, a large district of
     arable land, cut up into small fields, with stone walls between them.
     There, I admit that a bicycle is impossible. We can dismiss the idea.
     We turn to the country on the north. Here there lies a grove of
     trees, marked as the 'Ragged Shaw,' and on the farther side stretches
     a great rolling moor, Lower Gill Moor, extending for ten miles and
     sloping gradually upwards. Here, at one side of this wilderness, is
     Holdernesse Hall, ten miles by road, but only six across the moor. It
     is a peculiarly desolate plain. A few moor farmers have small
     holdings, where they rear sheep and cattle. Except these, the plover
     and the curlew are the only inhabitants until you come to the
     Chesterfield high road. There is a church there, you see, a few
     cottages, and an inn. Beyond that the hills become precipitous.
     Surely it is here to the north that our quest must lie."


     "But the bicycle?" I persisted.


     "Well, well!" said Holmes, impatiently. "A good cyclist does not need
     a high road. The moor is intersected with paths and the moon was at
     the full. Halloa! what is this?"


     There was an agitated knock at the door, and an instant afterwards
     Dr. Huxtable was in the room. In his hand he held a blue cricket-cap,
     with a white chevron on the peak.


     "At last we have a clue!" he cried. "Thank Heaven! at last we are on
     the dear boy's track! It is his cap."


     "Where was it found?"


     "In the van of the gipsies who camped on the moor. They left on
     Tuesday. To-day the police traced them down and examined their
     caravan. This was found."


     "How do they account for it?"


     "They shuffled and lied--said that they found it on the moor on
     Tuesday morning. They know where he is, the rascals! Thank goodness,
     they are all safe under lock and key. Either the fear of the law or
     the Duke's purse will certainly get out of them all that they know."


     "So far, so good," said Holmes, when the doctor had at last left the
     room. "It at least bears out the theory that it is on the side of the
     Lower Gill Moor that we must hope for results. The police have really
     done nothing locally, save the arrest of these gipsies. Look here,
     Watson! There is a watercourse across the moor. You see it marked
     here in the map. In some parts it widens into a morass. This is
     particularly so in the region between Holdernesse Hall and the
     school. It is vain to look elsewhere for tracks in this dry weather;
     but at that point there is certainly a chance of some record being
     left. I will call you early to-morrow morning, and you and I will try
     if we can throw some little light upon the mystery."


     The day was just breaking when I woke to find the long, thin form of
     Holmes by my bedside. He was fully dressed, and had apparently
     already been out.


     "I have done the lawn and the bicycle shed," said he. "I have also
     had a ramble through the Ragged Shaw. Now, Watson, there is cocoa
     ready in the next room. I must beg you to hurry, for we have a great
     day before us."


     His eyes shone, and his cheek was flushed with the exhilaration of
     the master workman who sees his work lie ready before him. A very
     different Holmes, this active, alert man, from the introspective and
     pallid dreamer of Baker Street. I felt, as I looked upon that supple
     figure, alive with nervous energy, that it was indeed a strenuous day
     that awaited us.


     And yet it opened in the blackest disappointment. With high hopes we
     struck across the peaty, russet moor, intersected with a thousand
     sheep paths, until we came to the broad, light-green belt which
     marked the morass between us and Holdernesse. Certainly, if the lad
     had gone homewards, he must have passed this, and he could not pass
     it without leaving his traces. But no sign of him or the German could
     be seen. With a darkening face my friend strode along the margin,
     eagerly observant of every muddy stain upon the mossy surface.
     Sheep-marks there were in profusion, and at one place, some miles
     down, cows had left their tracks. Nothing more.


     "Check number one," said Holmes, looking gloomily over the rolling
     expanse of the moor. "There is another morass down yonder and a
     narrow neck between. Halloa! halloa! halloa! what have we here?"


     We had come on a small black ribbon of pathway. In the middle of it,
     clearly marked on the sodden soil, was the track of a bicycle.


     "Hurrah!" I cried. "We have it."


     But Holmes was shaking his head, and his face was puzzled and
     expectant rather than joyous.


     "A bicycle, certainly, but not the bicycle," said he. "I am familiar
     with forty-two different impressions left by tyres. This, as you
     perceive, is a Dunlop, with a patch upon the outer cover. Heidegger's
     tyres were Palmer's, leaving longitudinal stripes. Aveling, the
     mathematical master, was sure upon the point. Therefore, it is not
     Heidegger's track."


     "The boy's, then?"


     "Possibly, if we could prove a bicycle to have been in his
     possession. But this we have utterly failed to do. This track, as you
     perceive, was made by a rider who was going from the direction of the
     school."


     "Or towards it?"


     "No, no, my dear Watson. The more deeply sunk impression is, of
     course, the hind wheel, upon which the weight rests. You perceive
     several places where it has passed across and obliterated the more
     shallow mark of the front one. It was undoubtedly heading away from
     the school. It may or may not be connected with our inquiry, but we
     will follow it backwards before we go any farther."


     We did so, and at the end of a few hundred yards lost the tracks as
     we emerged from the boggy portion of the moor. Following the path
     backwards, we picked out another spot, where a spring trickled across
     it. Here, once again, was the mark of the bicycle, though nearly
     obliterated by the hoofs of cows. After that there was no sign, but
     the path ran right on into Ragged Shaw, the wood which backed on to
     the school. From this wood the cycle must have emerged. Holmes sat
     down on a boulder and rested his chin in his hands. I had smoked two
     cigarettes before he moved.


     "Well, well," said he, at last. "It is, of course, possible that a
     cunning man might change the tyre of his bicycle in order to leave
     unfamiliar tracks. A criminal who was capable of such a thought is a
     man whom I should be proud to do business with. We will leave this
     question undecided and hark back to our morass again, for we have
     left a good deal unexplored."


     We continued our systematic survey of the edge of the sodden portion
     of the moor, and soon our perseverance was gloriously rewarded. Right
     across the lower part of the bog lay a miry path. Holmes gave a cry
     of delight as he approached it. An impression like a fine bundle of
     telegraph wires ran down the centre of it. It was the Palmer tyre.


     "Here is Herr Heidegger, sure enough!" cried Holmes, exultantly. "My
     reasoning seems to have been pretty sound, Watson."


     "I congratulate you."


     "But we have a long way still to go. Kindly walk clear of the path.
     Now let us follow the trail. I fear that it will not lead very far."


     We found, however, as we advanced that this portion of the moor is
     intersected with soft patches, and, though we frequently lost sight
     of the track, we always succeeded in picking it up once more.


     "Do you observe," said Holmes, "that the rider is now undoubtedly
     forcing the pace? There can be no doubt of it. Look at this
     impression, where you get both tyres clear. The one is as deep as the
     other. That can only mean that the rider is throwing his weight on to
     the handle-bar, as a man does when he is sprinting. By Jove! he has
     had a fall."


     There was a broad, irregular smudge covering some yards of the track.
     Then there were a few footmarks, and the tyre reappeared once more.


     "A side-slip," I suggested.


     Holmes held up a crumpled branch of flowering gorse. To my horror I
     perceived that the yellow blossoms were all dabbled with crimson. On
     the path, too, and among the heather were dark stains of clotted
     blood.


     "Bad!" said Holmes. "Bad! Stand clear, Watson! Not an unnecessary
     footstep! What do I read here? He fell wounded, he stood up, he
     remounted, he proceeded. But there is no other track. Cattle on this
     side path. He was surely not gored by a bull? Impossible! But I see
     no traces of anyone else. We must push on, Watson. Surely with stains
     as well as the track to guide us he cannot escape us now."


     Our search was not a very long one. The tracks of the tyre began to
     curve fantastically upon the wet and shining path. Suddenly, as I
     looked ahead, the gleam of metal caught my eye from amid the thick
     gorse bushes. Out of them we dragged a bicycle, Palmer-tyred, one
     pedal bent, and the whole front of it horribly smeared and slobbered
     with blood. On the other side of the bushes a shoe was projecting. We
     ran round, and there lay the unfortunate rider. He was a tall man,
     full bearded, with spectacles, one glass of which had been knocked
     out. The cause of his death was a frightful blow upon the head, which
     had crushed in part of his skull. That he could have gone on after
     receiving such an injury said much for the vitality and courage of
     the man. He wore shoes, but no socks, and his open coat disclosed a
     night-shirt beneath it. It was undoubtedly the German master.


     Holmes turned the body over reverently, and examined it with great
     attention. He then sat in deep thought for a time, and I could see by
     his ruffled brow that this grim discovery had not, in his opinion,
     advanced us much in our inquiry.


     "It is a little difficult to know what to do, Watson," said he, at
     last. "My own inclinations are to push this inquiry on, for we have
     already lost so much time that we cannot afford to waste another
     hour. On the other hand, we are bound to inform the police of the
     discovery, and to see that this poor fellow's body is looked after."


     "I could take a note back."


     "But I need your company and assistance. Wait a bit! There is a
     fellow cutting peat up yonder. Bring him over here, and he will guide
     the police."


     I brought the peasant across, and Holmes dispatched the frightened
     man with a note to Dr. Huxtable.


     "Now, Watson," said he, "we have picked up two clues this morning.
     One is the bicycle with the Palmer tyre, and we see what that has led
     to. The other is the bicycle with the patched Dunlop. Before we start
     to investigate that, let us try to realize what we do know so as to
     make the most of it, and to separate the essential from the
     accidental."


     "First of all I wish to impress upon you that the boy certainly left
     of his own free will. He got down from his window and he went off,
     either alone or with someone. That is sure."


     I assented.


     "Well, now, let us turn to this unfortunate German master. The boy
     was fully dressed when he fled. Therefore, he foresaw what he would
     do. But the German went without his socks. He certainly acted on very
     short notice."


     "Undoubtedly."


     "Why did he go? Because, from his bedroom window, he saw the flight
     of the boy. Because he wished to overtake him and bring him back. He
     seized his bicycle, pursued the lad, and in pursuing him met his
     death."


     "So it would seem."


     "Now I come to the critical part of my argument. The natural action
     of a man in pursuing a little boy would be to run after him. He would
     know that he could overtake him. But the German does not do so. He
     turns to his bicycle. I am told that he was an excellent cyclist. He
     would not do this if he did not see that the boy had some swift means
     of escape."


     "The other bicycle."


     "Let us continue our reconstruction. He meets his death five miles
     from the school--not by a bullet, mark you, which even a lad might
     conceivably discharge, but by a savage blow dealt by a vigorous arm.
     The lad, then, had a companion in his flight. And the flight was a
     swift one, since it took five miles before an expert cyclist could
     overtake them. Yet we survey the ground round the scene of the
     tragedy. What do we find? A few cattle tracks, nothing more. I took a
     wide sweep round, and there is no path within fifty yards. Another
     cyclist could have had nothing to do with the actual murder. Nor were
     there any human footmarks."


     "Holmes," I cried, "this is impossible."


     "Admirable!" he said. "A most illuminating remark. It is impossible
     as I state it, and therefore I must in some respect have stated it
     wrong. Yet you saw for yourself. Can you suggest any fallacy?"


     "He could not have fractured his skull in a fall?"


     "In a morass, Watson?"


     "I am at my wit's end."


     "Tut, tut; we have solved some worse problems. At least we have
     plenty of material, if we can only use it. Come, then, and, having
     exhausted the Palmer, let us see what the Dunlop with the patched
     cover has to offer us."


     We picked up the track and followed it onwards for some distance; but
     soon the moor rose into a long, heather-tufted curve, and we left the
     watercourse behind us. No further help from tracks could be hoped
     for. At the spot where we saw the last of the Dunlop tyre it might
     equally have led to Holdernesse Hall, the stately towers of which
     rose some miles to our left, or to a low, grey village which lay in
     front of us, and marked the position of the Chesterfield high road.


     As we approached the forbidding and squalid inn, with the sign of a
     game-cock above the door, Holmes gave a sudden groan and clutched me
     by the shoulder to save himself from falling. He had had one of those
     violent strains of the ankle which leave a man helpless. With
     difficulty he limped up to the door, where a squat, dark, elderly man
     was smoking a black clay pipe.


     "How are you, Mr. Reuben Hayes?" said Holmes.


     "Who are you, and how do you get my name so pat?" the countryman
     answered, with a suspicious flash of a pair of cunning eyes.


     "Well, it's printed on the board above your head. It's easy to see a
     man who is master of his own house. I suppose you haven't such a
     thing as a carriage in your stables?"


     "No; I have not."


     "I can hardly put my foot to the ground."


     "Don't put it to the ground."


     "But I can't walk."


     "Well, then, hop."


     Mr. Reuben Hayes's manner was far from gracious, but Holmes took it
     with admirable good-humour.


     "Look here, my man," said he. "This is really rather an awkward fix
     for me. I don't mind how I get on."


     "Neither do I," said the morose landlord.


     "The matter is very important. I would offer you a sovereign for the
     use of a bicycle."


     The landlord pricked up his ears.


     "Where do you want to go?"


     "To Holdernesse Hall."


     "Pals of the Dook, I suppose?" said the landlord, surveying our
     mud-stained garments with ironical eyes.


     Holmes laughed good-naturedly.


     "He'll be glad to see us, anyhow."


     "Why?"


     "Because we bring him news of his lost son."


     The landlord gave a very visible start.


     "What, you're on his track?"


     "He has been heard of in Liverpool. They expect to get him every
     hour."


     Again a swift change passed over the heavy, unshaven face. His manner
     was suddenly genial.


     "I've less reason to wish the Dook well than most men," said he, "for
     I was his head coachman once, and cruel bad he treated me. It was him
     that sacked me without a character on the word of a lying
     corn-chandler. But I'm glad to hear that the young lord was heard of
     in Liverpool, and I'll help you to take the news to the Hall."


     "Thank you," said Holmes. "We'll have some food first. Then you can
     bring round the bicycle."


     "I haven't got a bicycle."


     Holmes held up a sovereign.


     "I tell you, man, that I haven't got one. I'll let you have two
     horses as far as the Hall."


     "Well, well," said Holmes, "we'll talk about it when we've had
     something to eat."


     When we were left alone in the stone-flagged kitchen it was
     astonishing how rapidly that sprained ankle recovered. It was nearly
     nightfall, and we had eaten nothing since early morning, so that we
     spent some time over our meal. Holmes was lost in thought, and once
     or twice he walked over to the window and stared earnestly out. It
     opened on to a squalid courtyard. In the far corner was a smithy,
     where a grimy lad was at work. On the other side were the stables.
     Holmes had sat down again after one of these excursions, when he
     suddenly sprang out of his chair with a loud exclamation.


     "By Heaven, Watson, I believe that I've got it!" he cried. "Yes, yes,
     it must be so. Watson, do you remember seeing any cow-tracks to-day?"


     "Yes, several."


     "Where?"


     "Well, everywhere. They were at the morass, and again on the path,
     and again near where poor Heidegger met his death."


     "Exactly. Well, now, Watson, how many cows did you see on the moor?"


     "I don't remember seeing any."


     "Strange, Watson, that we should see tracks all along our line, but
     never a cow on the whole moor; very strange, Watson, eh?"


     "Yes, it is strange."


     "Now, Watson, make an effort; throw your mind back! Can you see those
     tracks upon the path?"


     "Yes, I can."


     "Can you recall that the tracks were sometimes like that, Watson"--he
     arranged a number of bread-crumbs in this fashion--: : : : :--"and
     sometimes like this"--: ` : ` : ` : `--"and occasionally like
     this"--. ` . ` . ` . "Can you remember that?"


     "No, I cannot."


     "But I can. I could swear to it. However, we will go back at our
     leisure and verify it. What a blind beetle I have been not to draw my
     conclusion!"


     "And what is your conclusion?"


     "Only that it is a remarkable cow which walks, canters, and gallops.
     By George, Watson, it was no brain of a country publican that thought
     out such a blind as that! The coast seems to be clear, save for that
     lad in the smithy. Let us slip out and see what we can see."


     There were two rough-haired, unkempt horses in the tumble-down
     stable. Holmes raised the hind leg of one of them and laughed aloud.


     "Old shoes, but newly shod--old shoes, but new nails. This case
     deserves to be a classic. Let us go across to the smithy."


     The lad continued his work without regarding us. I saw Holmes's eye
     darting to right and left among the litter of iron and wood which was
     scattered about the floor. Suddenly, however, we heard a step behind
     us, and there was the landlord, his heavy eyebrows drawn over his
     savage eyes, his swarthy features convulsed with passion. He held a
     short, metal-headed stick in his hand, and he advanced in so menacing
     a fashion that I was right glad to feel the revolver in my pocket.


     "You infernal spies!" the man cried. "What are you doing there?"


     "Why, Mr. Reuben Hayes," said Holmes, coolly, "one might think that
     you were afraid of our finding something out."


     The man mastered himself with a violent effort, and his grim mouth
     loosened into a false laugh, which was more menacing than his frown.


     "You're welcome to all you can find out in my smithy," said he. "But
     look here, mister, I don't care for folk poking about my place
     without my leave, so the sooner you pay your score and get out of
     this the better I shall be pleased."


     "All right, Mr. Hayes--no harm meant," said Holmes. "We have been
     having a look at your horses, but I think I'll walk after all. It's
     not far, I believe."


     "Not more than two miles to the Hall gates. That's the road to the
     left." He watched us with sullen eyes until we had left his premises.


     We did not go very far along the road, for Holmes stopped the instant
     that the curve hid us from the landlord's view.


     "We were warm, as the children say, at that inn," said he. "I seem to
     grow colder every step that I take away from it. No, no; I can't
     possibly leave it."


     "I am convinced," said I, "that this Reuben Hayes knows all about it.
     A more self-evident villain I never saw."


     "Oh! he impressed you in that way, did he? There are the horses,
     there is the smithy. Yes, it is an interesting place, this Fighting
     Cock. I think we shall have another look at it in an unobtrusive
     way."


     A long, sloping hillside, dotted with grey limestone boulders,
     stretched behind us. We had turned off the road, and were making our
     way up the hill, when, looking in the direction of Holdernesse Hall,
     I saw a cyclist coming swiftly along.


     "Get down, Watson!" cried Holmes, with a heavy hand upon my shoulder.
     We had hardly sunk from view when the man flew past us on the road.
     Amid a rolling cloud of dust I caught a glimpse of a pale, agitated
     face--a face with horror in every lineament, the mouth open, the eyes
     staring wildly in front. It was like some strange caricature of the
     dapper James Wilder whom we had seen the night before.


     "The Duke's secretary!" cried Holmes. "Come, Watson, let us see what
     he does."


     We scrambled from rock to rock until in a few moments we had made our
     way to a point from which we could see the front door of the inn.
     Wilder's bicycle was leaning against the wall beside it. No one was
     moving about the house, nor could we catch a glimpse of any faces at
     the windows. Slowly the twilight crept down as the sun sank behind
     the high towers of Holdernesse Hall. Then in the gloom we saw the two
     side-lamps of a trap light up in the stable yard of the inn, and
     shortly afterwards heard the rattle of hoofs, as it wheeled out into
     the road and tore off at a furious pace in the direction of
     Chesterfield.


     "What do you make of that, Watson?" Holmes whispered.


     "It looks like a flight."


     "A single man in a dog-cart, so far as I could see. Well, it
     certainly was not Mr. James Wilder, for there he is at the door."


     A red square of light had sprung out of the darkness. In the middle
     of it was the black figure of the secretary, his head advanced,
     peering out into the night. It was evident that he was expecting
     someone. Then at last there were steps in the road, a second figure
     was visible for an instant against the light, the door shut, and all
     was black once more. Five minutes later a lamp was lit in a room upon
     the first floor.


     "It seems to be a curious class of custom that is done by the
     Fighting Cock," said Holmes.


     "The bar is on the other side."


     "Quite so. These are what one may call the private guests. Now, what
     in the world is Mr. James Wilder doing in that den at this hour of
     night, and who is the companion who comes to meet him there? Come,
     Watson, we must really take a risk and try to investigate this a
     little more closely."


     Together we stole down to the road and crept across to the door of
     the inn. The bicycle still leaned against the wall. Holmes struck a
     match and held it to the back wheel, and I heard him chuckle as the
     light fell upon a patched Dunlop tyre. Up above us was the lighted
     window.


     "I must have a peep through that, Watson. If you bend your back and
     support yourself upon the wall, I think that I can manage."


     An instant later his feet were on my shoulders. But he was hardly up
     before he was down again.


     "Come, my friend," said he, "our day's work has been quite long
     enough. I think that we have gathered all that we can. It's a long
     walk to the school, and the sooner we get started the better."


     He hardly opened his lips during that weary trudge across the moor,
     nor would he enter the school when he reached it, but went on to
     Mackleton Station, whence he could send some telegrams. Late at night
     I heard him consoling Dr. Huxtable, prostrated by the tragedy of his
     master's death, and later still he entered my room as alert and
     vigorous as he had been when he started in the morning. "All goes
     well, my friend," said he. "I promise that before to-morrow evening
     we shall have reached the solution of the mystery."


     At eleven o'clock next morning my friend and I were walking up the
     famous yew avenue of Holdernesse Hall. We were ushered through the
     magnificent Elizabethan doorway and into his Grace's study. There we
     found Mr. James Wilder, demure and courtly, but with some trace of
     that wild terror of the night before still lurking in his furtive
     eyes and in his twitching features.


     "You have come to see his Grace? I am sorry; but the fact is that the
     Duke is far from well. He has been very much upset by the tragic
     news. We received a telegram from Dr. Huxtable yesterday afternoon,
     which told us of your discovery."


     "I must see the Duke, Mr. Wilder."


     "But he is in his room."


     "Then I must go to his room."


     "I believe he is in his bed."


     "I will see him there."


     Holmes's cold and inexorable manner showed the secretary that it was
     useless to argue with him.


     "Very good, Mr. Holmes; I will tell him that you are here."


     After half an hour's delay the great nobleman appeared. His face was
     more cadaverous than ever, his shoulders had rounded, and he seemed
     to me to be an altogether older man than he had been the morning
     before. He greeted us with a stately courtesy and seated himself at
     his desk, his red beard streaming down on to the table.


     "Well, Mr. Holmes?" said he.


     But my friend's eyes were fixed upon the secretary, who stood by his
     master's chair.


     "I think, your Grace, that I could speak more freely in Mr. Wilder's
     absence."


     The man turned a shade paler and cast a malignant glance at Holmes.


     "If your Grace wishes--"


     "Yes, yes; you had better go. Now, Mr. Holmes, what have you to say?"


     My friend waited until the door had closed behind the retreating
     secretary.


     "The fact is, your Grace," said he, "that my colleague, Dr. Watson,
     and myself had an assurance from Dr. Huxtable that a reward had been
     offered in this case. I should like to have this confirmed from your
     own lips."


     "Certainly, Mr. Holmes."


     "It amounted, if I am correctly informed, to five thousand pounds to
     anyone who will tell you where your son is?"


     "Exactly."


     "And another thousand to the man who will name the person or persons
     who keep him in custody?"


     "Exactly."


     "Under the latter heading is included, no doubt, not only those who
     may have taken him away, but also those who conspire to keep him in
     his present position?"


     "Yes, yes," cried the Duke, impatiently. "If you do your work well,
     Mr. Sherlock Holmes, you will have no reason to complain of niggardly
     treatment."


     My friend rubbed his thin hands together with an appearance of
     avidity which was a surprise to me, who knew his frugal tastes.


     "I fancy that I see your Grace's cheque-book upon the table," said
     he. "I should be glad if you would make me out a cheque for six
     thousand pounds. It would be as well, perhaps, for you to cross it.
     The Capital and Counties Bank, Oxford Street branch, are my agents."


     His Grace sat very stern and upright in his chair, and looked stonily
     at my friend.


     "Is this a joke, Mr. Holmes? It is hardly a subject for pleasantry."


     "Not at all, your Grace. I was never more earnest in my life."


     "What do you mean, then?"


     "I mean that I have earned the reward. I know where your son is, and
     I know some, at least, of those who are holding him."


     The Duke's beard had turned more aggressively red than ever against
     his ghastly white face.


     "Where is he?" he gasped. 


     "He is, or was last night, at the Fighting Cock Inn, about two miles
     from your park gate."


     The Duke fell back in his chair.


     "And whom do you accuse?"


     Sherlock Holmes's answer was an astounding one. He stepped swiftly
     forward and touched the Duke upon the shoulder.


     "I accuse you," said he. "And now, your Grace, I'll trouble you for
     that cheque."


     Never shall I forget the Duke's appearance as he sprang up and clawed
     with his hands like one who is sinking into an abyss. Then, with an
     extraordinary effort of aristocratic self-command, he sat down and
     sank his face in his hands. It was some minutes before he spoke.


     "How much do you know?" he asked at last, without raising his head.


     "I saw you together last night."


     "Does anyone else besides your friend know?"


     "I have spoken to no one."


     The Duke took a pen in his quivering fingers and opened his
     cheque-book.


     "I shall be as good as my word, Mr. Holmes. I am about to write your
     cheque, however unwelcome the information which you have gained may
     be to me. When the offer was first made I little thought the turn
     which events might take. But you and your friend are men of
     discretion, Mr. Holmes?"


     "I hardly understand your Grace."


     "I must put it plainly, Mr. Holmes. If only you two know of this
     incident, there is no reason why it should go any farther. I think
     twelve thousand pounds is the sum that I owe you, is it not?"


     But Holmes smiled and shook his head.


     "I fear, your Grace, that matters can hardly be arranged so easily.
     There is the death of this schoolmaster to be accounted for."


     "But James knew nothing of that. You cannot hold him responsible for
     that. It was the work of this brutal ruffian whom he had the
     misfortune to employ."


     "I must take the view, your Grace, that when a man embarks upon a
     crime he is morally guilty of any other crime which may spring from
     it."


     "Morally, Mr. Holmes. No doubt you are right. But surely not in the
     eyes of the law. A man cannot be condemned for a murder at which he
     was not present, and which he loathes and abhors as much as you do.
     The instant that he heard of it he made a complete confession to me,
     so filled was he with horror and remorse. He lost not an hour in
     breaking entirely with the murderer. Oh, Mr. Holmes, you must save
     him--you must save him! I tell you that you must save him!" The Duke
     had dropped the last attempt at self-command, and was pacing the room
     with a convulsed face and with his clenched hands raving in the air.
     At last he mastered himself and sat down once more at his desk. "I
     appreciate your conduct in coming here before you spoke to anyone
     else," said he. "At least, we may take counsel how far we can
     minimize this hideous scandal."


     "Exactly," said Holmes. "I think, your Grace, that this can only be
     done by absolute and complete frankness between us. I am disposed to
     help your Grace to the best of my ability; but in order to do so I
     must understand to the last detail how the matter stands. I realize
     that your words applied to Mr. James Wilder, and that he is not the
     murderer."


     "No; the murderer has escaped."


     Sherlock Holmes smiled demurely.


     "Your Grace can hardly have heard of any small reputation which I
     possess, or you would not imagine that it is so easy to escape me.
     Mr. Reuben Hayes was arrested at Chesterfield on my information at
     eleven o'clock last night. I had a telegram from the head of the
     local police before I left the school this morning."


     The Duke leaned back in his chair and stared with amazement at my
     friend.


     "You seem to have powers that are hardly human," said he. "So Reuben
     Hayes is taken? I am right glad to hear it, if it will not react upon
     the fate of James."


     "Your secretary?"


     "No, sir; my son."


     It was Holmes's turn to look astonished.


     "I confess that this is entirely new to me, your Grace. I must beg
     you to be more explicit."


     "I will conceal nothing from you. I agree with you that complete
     frankness, however painful it may be to me, is the best policy in
     this desperate situation to which James's folly and jealousy have
     reduced us. When I was a very young man, Mr. Holmes, I loved with
     such a love as comes only once in a lifetime. I offered the lady
     marriage, but she refused it on the grounds that such a match might
     mar my career. Had she lived I would certainly never have married
     anyone else. She died, and left this one child, whom for her sake I
     have cherished and cared for. I could not acknowledge the paternity
     to the world; but I gave him the best of educations, and since he
     came to manhood I have kept him near my person. He surprised my
     secret, and has presumed ever since upon the claim which he has upon
     me and upon his power of provoking a scandal, which would be
     abhorrent to me. His presence had something to do with the unhappy
     issue of my marriage. Above all, he hated my young legitimate heir
     from the first with a persistent hatred. You may well ask me why,
     under these circumstances, I still kept James under my roof. I answer
     that it was because I could see his mother's face in his, and that
     for her dear sake there was no end to my long-suffering. All her
     pretty ways, too--there was not one of them which he could not
     suggest and bring back to my memory. I could not send him away. But I
     feared so much lest he should do Arthur--that is, Lord Saltire--a
     mischief that I dispatched him for safety to Dr. Huxtable's school.


     "James came into contact with this fellow Hayes because the man was a
     tenant of mine, and James acted as agent. The fellow was a rascal
     from the beginning; but in some extraordinary way James became
     intimate with him. He had always a taste for low company. When James
     determined to kidnap Lord Saltire it was of this man's service that
     he availed himself. You remember that I wrote to Arthur upon that
     last day. Well, James opened the letter and inserted a note asking
     Arthur to meet him in a little wood called the Ragged Shaw, which is
     near to the school. He used the Duchess's name, and in that way got
     the boy to come. That evening James bicycled over--I am telling you
     what he has himself confessed to me--and he told Arthur, whom he met
     in the wood, that his mother longed to see him, that she was awaiting
     him on the moor, and that if he would come back into the wood at
     midnight he would find a man with a horse, who would take him to her.
     Poor Arthur fell into the trap. He came to the appointment and found
     this fellow Hayes with a led pony. Arthur mounted, and they set off
     together. It appears--though this James only heard yesterday--that
     they were pursued, that Hayes struck the pursuer with his stick, and
     that the man died of his injuries. Hayes brought Arthur to his
     public-house, the Fighting Cock, where he was confined in an upper
     room, under the care of Mrs. Hayes, who is a kindly woman, but
     entirely under the control of her brutal husband.


     "Well, Mr. Holmes, that was the state of affairs when I first saw you
     two days ago. I had no more idea of the truth than you. You will ask
     me what was James's motive in doing such a deed. I answer that there
     was a great deal which was unreasoning and fanatical in the hatred
     which he bore my heir. In his view he should himself have been heir
     of all my estates, and he deeply resented those social laws which
     made it impossible. At the same time he had a definite motive also.
     He was eager that I should break the entail, and he was of opinion
     that it lay in my power to do so. He intended to make a bargain with
     me--to restore Arthur if I would break the entail, and so make it
     possible for the estate to be left to him by will. He knew well that
     I should never willingly invoke the aid of the police against him. I
     say that he would have proposed such a bargain to me, but he did not
     actually do so, for events moved too quickly for him, and he had not
     time to put his plans into practice.


     "What brought all his wicked scheme to wreck was your discovery of
     this man Heidegger's dead body. James was seized with horror at the
     news. It came to us yesterday as we sat together in this study. Dr.
     Huxtable had sent a telegram. James was so overwhelmed with grief and
     agitation that my suspicions, which had never been entirely absent,
     rose instantly to a certainty, and I taxed him with the deed. He made
     a complete voluntary confession. Then he implored me to keep his
     secret for three days longer, so as to give his wretched accomplice a
     chance of saving his guilty life. I yielded--as I have always
     yielded--to his prayers, and instantly James hurried off to the
     Fighting Cock to warn Hayes and give him the means of flight. I could
     not go there by daylight without provoking comment, but as soon as
     night fell I hurried off to see my dear Arthur. I found him safe and
     well, but horrified beyond expression by the dreadful deed he had
     witnessed. In deference to my promise, and much against my will, I
     consented to leave him there for three days under the charge of Mrs.
     Hayes, since it was evident that it was impossible to inform the
     police where he was without telling them also who was the murderer,
     and I could not see how that murderer could be punished without ruin
     to my unfortunate James. You asked for frankness, Mr. Holmes, and I
     have taken you at your word, for I have now told you everything
     without an attempt at circumlocution or concealment. Do you in turn
     be as frank with me."


     "I will," said Holmes. "In the first place, your Grace, I am bound to
     tell you that you have placed yourself in a most serious position in
     the eyes of the law. You have condoned a felony and you have aided
     the escape of a murderer; for I cannot doubt that any money which was
     taken by James Wilder to aid his accomplice in his flight came from
     your Grace's purse."


     The Duke bowed his assent.


     "This is indeed a most serious matter. Even more culpable in my
     opinion, your Grace, is your attitude towards your younger son. You
     leave him in this den for three days."


     "Under solemn promises--"


     "What are promises to such people as these? You have no guarantee
     that he will not be spirited away again. To humour your guilty elder
     son you have exposed your innocent younger son to imminent and
     unnecessary danger. It was a most unjustifiable action."


     The proud lord of Holdernesse was not accustomed to be so rated in
     his own ducal hall. The blood flushed into his high forehead, but his
     conscience held him dumb.


     "I will help you, but on one condition only. It is that you ring for
     the footman and let me give such orders as I like."


     Without a word the Duke pressed the electric bell. A servant entered.


     "You will be glad to hear," said Holmes, "that your young master is
     found. It is the Duke's desire that the carriage shall go at once to
     the Fighting Cock Inn to bring Lord Saltire home.


     "Now," said Holmes, when the rejoicing lackey had disappeared,
     "having secured the future, we can afford to be more lenient with the
     past. I am not in an official position, and there is no reason, so
     long as the ends of justice are served, why I should disclose all
     that I know. As to Hayes I say nothing. The gallows awaits him, and I
     would do nothing to save him from it. What he will divulge I cannot
     tell, but I have no doubt that your Grace could make him understand
     that it is to his interest to be silent. From the police point of
     view he will have kidnapped the boy for the purpose of ransom. If
     they do not themselves find it out I see no reason why I should
     prompt them to take a broader point of view. I would warn your Grace,
    however, that the continued presence of Mr. James Wilder in your
     household can only lead to misfortune."


     "I understand that, Mr. Holmes, and it is already settled that he
     shall leave me for ever and go to seek his fortune in Australia."


     "In that case, your Grace, since you have yourself stated that any
     unhappiness in your married life was caused by his presence, I would
     suggest that you make such amends as you can to the Duchess, and that
     you try to resume those relations which have been so unhappily
     interrupted."


     "That also I have arranged, Mr. Holmes. I wrote to the Duchess this
     morning."


     "In that case," said Holmes, rising, "I think that my friend and I
     can congratulate ourselves upon several most happy results from our
     little visit to the North. There is one other small point upon which
     I desire some light. This fellow Hayes had shod his horses with shoes
     which counterfeited the tracks of cows. Was it from Mr. Wilder that
     he learned so extraordinary a device?"


     The Duke stood in thought for a moment, with a look of intense
     surprise on his face. Then he opened a door and showed us into a
     large room furnished as a museum. He led the way to a glass case in a
     corner, and pointed to the inscription.


     "These shoes," it ran, "were dug up in the moat of Holdernesse Hall.
     They are for the use of horses; but they are shaped below with a
     cloven foot of iron, so as to throw pursuers off the track. They are
     supposed to have belonged to some of the marauding Barons of
     Holdernesse in the Middle Ages."


     Holmes opened the case, and moistening his finger he passed it along
     the shoe. A thin film of recent mud was left upon his skin.


     "Thank you," said he, as he replaced the glass. "It is the second
     most interesting object that I have seen in the North."


     "And the first?"


     Holmes folded up his cheque and placed it carefully in his note-book.
     "I am a poor man," said he, as he patted it affectionately and thrust
     it into the depths of his inner pocket.