It was in the year '95 that a combination of events, into which I
     need not enter, caused Mr. Sherlock Holmes and myself to spend some
     weeks in one of our great University towns, and it was during this
     time that the small but instructive adventure which I am about to
     relate befell us. It will be obvious that any details which would
     help the reader to exactly identify the college or the criminal would
     be injudicious and offensive. So painful a scandal may well be
     allowed to die out. With due discretion the incident itself may,
     however, be described, since it serves to illustrate some of those
     qualities for which my friend was remarkable. I will endeavour in my
     statement to avoid such terms as would serve to limit the events to
     any particular place, or give a clue as to the people concerned.




     We were residing at the time in furnished lodgings close to a library
     where Sherlock Holmes was pursuing some laborious researches in early
     English charters--researches which led to results so striking that
     they may be the subject of one of my future narratives. Here it was
     that one evening we received a visit from an acquaintance, Mr. Hilton
     Soames, tutor and lecturer at the College of St. Luke's. Mr. Soames
     was a tall, spare man, of a nervous and excitable temperament. I had
     always known him to be restless in his manner, but on this particular
     occasion he was in such a state of uncontrollable agitation that it
     was clear something very unusual had occurred.




     "I trust, Mr. Holmes, that you can spare me a few hours of your
     valuable time. We have had a very painful incident at St. Luke's, and
     really, but for the happy chance of your being in the town, I should
     have been at a loss what to do."




     "I am very busy just now, and I desire no distractions," my friend
     answered. "I should much prefer that you called in the aid of the
     police."




     "No, no, my dear sir; such a course is utterly impossible. When once
     the law is evoked it cannot be stayed again, and this is just one of
     those cases where, for the credit of the college, it is most
     essential to avoid scandal. Your discretion is as well known as your
     powers, and you are the one man in the world who can help me. I beg
     you, Mr. Holmes, to do what you can."




     My friend's temper had not improved since he had been deprived of the
     congenial surroundings of Baker Street. Without his scrap-books, his
     chemicals, and his homely untidiness, he was an uncomfortable man. He
     shrugged his shoulders in ungracious acquiescence, while our visitor
     in hurried words and with much excitable gesticulation poured forth
     his story.




     "I must explain to you, Mr. Holmes, that to-morrow is the first day
     of the examination for the Fortescue Scholarship. I am one of the
     examiners. My subject is Greek, and the first of the papers consists
     of a large passage of Greek translation which the candidate has not
     seen. This passage is printed on the examination paper, and it would
     naturally be an immense advantage if the candidate could prepare it
     in advance. For this reason great care is taken to keep the paper
     secret.




     "To-day about three o'clock the proofs of this paper arrived from the
     printers. The exercise consists of half a chapter of Thucydides. I
     had to read it over carefully, as the text must be absolutely
     correct. At four-thirty my task was not yet completed. I had,
     however, promised to take tea in a friend's rooms, so I left the
     proof upon my desk. I was absent rather more than an hour.




     "You are aware, Mr. Holmes, that our college doors are double--a
     green baize one within and a heavy oak one without. As I approached
     my outer door I was amazed to see a key in it. For an instant I
     imagined that I had left my own there, but on feeling in my pocket I
     found that it was all right. The only duplicate which existed, so far
     as I knew, was that which belonged to my servant, Bannister, a man
     who has looked after my room for ten years, and whose honesty is
     absolutely above suspicion. I found that the key was indeed his, that
     he had entered my room to know if I wanted tea, and that he had very
     carelessly left the key in the door when he came out. His visit to my
     room must have been within a very few minutes of my leaving it. His
     forgetfulness about the key would have mattered little upon any other
     occasion, but on this one day it has produced the most deplorable
     consequences.




     "The moment I looked at my table I was aware that someone had
     rummaged among my papers. The proof was in three long slips. I had
     left them all together. Now, I found that one of them was lying on
     the floor, one was on the side table near the window, and the third
     was where I had left it."




     Holmes stirred for the first time.




     "The first page on the floor, the second in the window, the third
     where you left it," said he.




     "Exactly, Mr. Holmes. You amaze me. How could you possibly know
     that?"




     "Pray continue your very interesting statement."




     "For an instant I imagined that Bannister had taken the unpardonable
     liberty of examining my papers. He denied it, however, with the
     utmost earnestness, and I am convinced that he was speaking the
     truth. The alternative was that someone passing had observed the key
     in the door, had known that I was out, and had entered to look at the
     papers. A large sum of money is at stake, for the scholarship is a
     very valuable one, and an unscrupulous man might very well run a risk
     in order to gain an advantage over his fellows.




     "Bannister was very much upset by the incident. He had nearly fainted
     when we found that the papers had undoubtedly been tampered with. I
     gave him a little brandy and left him collapsed in a chair while I
     made a most careful examination of the room. I soon saw that the
     intruder had left other traces of his presence besides the rumpled
     papers. On the table in the window were several shreds from a pencil
     which had been sharpened. A broken tip of lead was lying there also.
     Evidently the rascal had copied the paper in a great hurry, had
     broken his pencil, and had been compelled to put a fresh point to
     it."




     "Excellent!" said Holmes, who was recovering his good-humour as his
     attention became more engrossed by the case. "Fortune has been your
     friend."




     "This was not all. I have a new writing-table with a fine surface of
     red leather. I am prepared to swear, and so is Bannister, that it was
     smooth and unstained. Now I found a clean cut in it about three
     inches long--not a mere scratch, but a positive cut. Not only this,
     but on the table I found a small ball of black dough, or clay, with
     specks of something which looks like sawdust in it. I am convinced
     that these marks were left by the man who rifled the papers. There
     were no footmarks and no other evidence as to his identity. I was at
     my wits' ends, when suddenly the happy thought occurred to me that
     you were in the town, and I came straight round to put the matter
     into your hands. Do help me, Mr. Holmes! You see my dilemma. Either I
     must find the man or else the examination must be postponed until
     fresh papers are prepared, and since this cannot be done without
     explanation there will ensue a hideous scandal, which will throw a
     cloud not only on the college, but on the University. Above all
     things I desire to settle the matter quietly and discreetly."




     "I shall be happy to look into it and to give you such advice as I
     can," said Holmes, rising and putting on his overcoat. "The case is
     not entirely devoid of interest. Had anyone visited you in your room
     after the papers came to you?"




     "Yes; young Daulat Ras, an Indian student who lives on the same
     stair, came in to ask me some particulars about the examination."




     "For which he was entered?"




     "Yes."




     "And the papers were on your table?"




     "To the best of my belief they were rolled up."




     "But might be recognised as proofs?"




     "Possibly."




     "No one else in your room?"




     "No."




     "Did anyone know that these proofs would be there?"




     "No one save the printer."




     "Did this man Bannister know?"




     "No, certainly not. No one knew."




     "Where is Bannister now?"




     "He was very ill, poor fellow. I left him collapsed in the chair. I
     was in such a hurry to come to you."




     "You left your door open?"




     "I locked up the papers first."




     "Then it amounts to this, Mr. Soames, that unless the Indian student
     recognised the roll as being proofs, the man who tampered with them
     came upon them accidentally without knowing that they were there."




     "So it seems to me."




     Holmes gave an enigmatic smile.




     "Well," said he, "let us go round. Not one of your cases,
     Watson--mental, not physical. All right; come if you want to. Now,
     Mr. Soames--at your disposal!"




      The sitting-room of our client opened by a long, low, latticed
     window on to the ancient lichen-tinted court of the old college. A
     Gothic arched door led to a worn stone staircase. On the ground floor
     was the tutor's room. Above were three students, one on each story.
     It was already twilight when we reached the scene of our problem.
     Holmes halted and looked earnestly at the window. Then he approached
     it, and, standing on tiptoe with his neck craned, he looked into the
     room.




     "He must have entered through the door. There is no opening except
     the one pane," said our learned guide.




     "Dear me!" said Holmes, and he smiled in a singular way as he glanced
     at our companion. "Well, if there is nothing to be learned here we
     had best go inside."




     The lecturer unlocked the outer door and ushered us into his room. We
     stood at the entrance while Holmes made an examination of the carpet.




     "I am afraid there are no signs here," said he. "One could hardly
     hope for any upon so dry a day. Your servant seems to have quite
     recovered. You left him in a chair, you say; which chair?"




     "By the window there."




     "I see. Near this little table. You can come in now. I have finished
     with the carpet. Let us take the little table first. Of course, what
     has happened is very clear. The man entered and took the papers,
     sheet by sheet, from the central table. He carried them over to the
     window table, because from there he could see if you came across the
     courtyard, and so could effect an escape."




     "As a matter of fact he could not," said Soames, "for I entered by
     the side door."




     "Ah, that's good! Well, anyhow, that was in his mind. Let me see the
     three strips. No finger impressions--no! Well, he carried over this
     one first and he copied it. How long would it take him to do that,
     using every possible contraction? A quarter of an hour, not less.
     Then he tossed it down and seized the next. He was in the midst of
     that when your return caused him to make a very hurried retreat--very
     hurried, since he had not time to replace the papers which would tell
     you that he had been there. You were not aware of any hurrying feet
     on the stair as you entered the outer door?"




     "No, I can't say I was."




     "Well, he wrote so furiously that he broke his pencil, and had, as
     you observe, to sharpen it again. This is of interest, Watson. The
     pencil was not an ordinary one. It was above the usual size, with a
     soft lead; the outer colour was dark blue, the maker's name was
     printed in silver lettering, and the piece remaining is only about an
     inch and a half long. Look for such a pencil, Mr. Soames, and you
     have got your man. When I add that he possesses a large and very
     blunt knife, you have an additional aid."




     Mr. Soames was somewhat overwhelmed by this flood of information. "I
     can follow the other points," said he, "but really, in this matter of
     the length--"




     Holmes held out a small chip with the letters NN and a space of clear
     wood after them.




     "You see?"




     "No, I fear that even now--"




     "Watson, I have always done you an injustice. There are others. What
     could this NN be? It is at the end of a word. You are aware that
     Johann Faber is the most common maker's name. Is it not clear that
     there is just as much of the pencil left as usually follows the
     Johann?" He held the small table sideways to the electric light. "I
     was hoping that if the paper on which he wrote was thin some trace of
     it might come through upon this polished surface. No, I see nothing.
     I don't think there is anything more to be learned here. Now for the
     central table. This small pellet is, I presume, the black, doughy
     mass you spoke of. Roughly pyramidal in shape and hollowed out, I
     perceive. As you say, there appear to be grains of sawdust in it.
     Dear me, this is very interesting. And the cut--a positive tear, I
     see. It began with a thin scratch and ended in a jagged hole. I am
     much indebted to you for directing my attention to this case, Mr.
     Soames. Where does that door lead to?"




     "To my bedroom."




     "Have you been in it since your adventure?"




     "No; I came straight away for you."




     "I should like to have a glance round. What a charming, old-fashioned
     room! Perhaps you will kindly wait a minute until I have examined the
     floor. No, I see nothing. What about this curtain? You hang your
     clothes behind it. If anyone were forced to conceal himself in this
     room he must do it there, since the bed is too low and the wardrobe
     too shallow. No one there, I suppose?"




     As Holmes drew the curtain I was aware, from some little rigidity and
     alertness of his attitude, that he was prepared for an emergency. As
     a matter of fact the drawn curtain disclosed nothing but three or
     four suits of clothes hanging from a line of pegs. Holmes turned away
     and stooped suddenly to the floor.




     "Halloa! What's this?" said he.




     It was a small pyramid of black, putty-like stuff, exactly like the
     one upon the table of the study. Holmes held it out on his open palm
     in the glare of the electric light.




     "Your visitor seems to have left traces in your bedroom as well as in
     your sitting-room, Mr. Soames."




     "What could he have wanted there?"




     "I think it is clear enough. You came back by an unexpected way, and
     so he had no warning until you were at the very door. What could he
     do? He caught up everything which would betray him and he rushed into
     your bedroom to conceal himself."




     "Good gracious, Mr. Holmes, do you mean to tell me that all the time
     I was talking to Bannister in this room we had the man prisoner if we
     had only known it?"




     "So I read it."




     "Surely there is another alternative, Mr. Holmes. I don't know
     whether you observed my bedroom window?"




     "Lattice-paned, lead framework, three separate windows, one swinging
     on hinge and large enough to admit a man."




     "Exactly. And it looks out on an angle of the courtyard so as to be
     partly invisible. The man might have effected his entrance there,
     left traces as he passed through the bedroom, and, finally, finding
     the door open have escaped that way."




     Holmes shook his head impatiently.




     "Let us be practical," said he. "I understand you to say that there
     are three students who use this stair and are in the habit of passing
     your door?"




     "Yes, there are."




     "And they are all in for this examination?"




     "Yes."




     "Have you any reason to suspect any one of them more than the
     others?"




     Soames hesitated.




     "It is a very delicate question," said he. "One hardly likes to throw
     suspicion where there are no proofs."




     "Let us hear the suspicions. I will look after the proofs."




     "I will tell you, then, in a few words the character of the three men
     who inhabit these rooms. The lower of the three is Gilchrist, a fine
     scholar and athlete; plays in the Rugby team and the cricket team for
     the college, and got his Blue for the hurdles and the long jump. He
     is a fine, manly fellow. His father was the notorious Sir Jabez
     Gilchrist, who ruined himself on the turf. My scholar has been left
     very poor, but he is hard-working and industrious. He will do well.




     "The second floor is inhabited by Daulat Ras, the Indian. He is a
     quiet, inscrutable fellow, as most of those Indians are. He is well
     up in his work, though his Greek is his weak subject. He is steady
     and methodical.




     "The top floor belongs to Miles McLaren. He is a brilliant fellow
     when he chooses to work--one of the brightest intellects of the
     University, but he is wayward, dissipated, and unprincipled. He was
     nearly expelled over a card scandal in his first year. He has been
     idling all this term, and he must look forward with dread to the
     examination."




     "Then it is he whom you suspect?"




     "I dare not go so far as that. But of the three he is perhaps the
     least unlikely."




     "Exactly. Now, Mr. Soames, let us have a look at your servant,
     Bannister."




     He was a little, white-faced, clean-shaven, grizzly-haired fellow of
     fifty. He was still suffering from this sudden disturbance of the
     quiet routine of his life. His plump face was twitching with his
     nervousness, and his fingers could not keep still.




     "We are investigating this unhappy business, Bannister," said his
     master.




     "Yes, sir."




     "I understand," said Holmes, "that you left your key in the door?"




     "Yes, sir."




     "Was it not very extraordinary that you should do this on the very
     day when there were these papers inside?"




     "It was most unfortunate, sir. But I have occasionally done the same
     thing at other times."




     "When did you enter the room?"




     "It was about half-past four. That is Mr. Soames's tea time."




     "How long did you stay?"




     "When I saw that he was absent I withdrew at once."




     "Did you look at these papers on the table?"




     "No, sir; certainly not."




     "How came you to leave the key in the door?"




     "I had the tea-tray in my hand. I thought I would come back for the
     key. Then I forgot."




     "Has the outer door a spring lock?"




     "No, sir."




     "Then it was open all the time?"




     "Yes, sir."




     "Anyone in the room could get out?"




     "Yes, sir."




     "When Mr. Soames returned and called for you, you were very much
     disturbed?"




     "Yes, sir. Such a thing has never happened during the many years that
     I have been here. I nearly fainted, sir."




     "So I understand. Where were you when you began to feel bad?"




     "Where was I, sir? Why, here, near the door."




     "That is singular, because you sat down in that chair over yonder
     near the corner. Why did you pass these other chairs?"




     "I don't know, sir. It didn't matter to me where I sat."




     "I really don't think he knew much about it, Mr. Holmes. He was
     looking very bad--quite ghastly."




     "You stayed here when your master left?"




     "Only for a minute or so. Then I locked the door and went to my
     room."




     "Whom do you suspect?"




     "Oh, I would not venture to say, sir. I don't believe there is any
     gentleman in this University who is capable of profiting by such an
     action. No, sir, I'll not believe it."




     "Thank you; that will do," said Holmes. "Oh, one more word. You have
     not mentioned to any of the three gentlemen whom you attend that
     anything is amiss?"




     "No, sir; not a word."




     "You haven't seen any of them?"




     "No, sir."




     "Very good. Now, Mr. Soames, we will take a walk in the quadrangle,
     if you please."




     Three yellow squares of light shone above us in the gathering gloom.




     "Your three birds are all in their nests," said Holmes, looking up.
     "Halloa! What's that? One of them seems restless enough."




     It was the Indian, whose dark silhouette appeared suddenly upon his
     blind. He was pacing swiftly up and down his room.




     "I should like to have a peep at each of them," said Holmes. "Is it
     possible?"




     "No difficulty in the world," Soames answered. "This set of rooms is
     quite the oldest in the college, and it is not unusual for visitors
     to go over them. Come along, and I will personally conduct you."




     "No names, please!" said Holmes, as we knocked at Gilchrist's door. A
     tall, flaxen-haired, slim young fellow opened it, and made us welcome
     when he understood our errand. There were some really curious pieces
     of mediaeval domestic architecture within. Holmes was so charmed with
     one of them that he insisted on drawing it on his note-book, broke
     his pencil, had to borrow one from our host, and finally borrowed a
     knife to sharpen his own. The same curious accident happened to him
     in the rooms of the Indian--a silent, little, hook-nosed fellow, who
     eyed us askance and was obviously glad when Holmes's architectural
     studies had come to an end. I could not see that in either case
     Holmes had come upon the clue for which he was searching. Only at the
     third did our visit prove abortive. The outer door would not open to
     our knock, and nothing more substantial than a torrent of bad
     language came from behind it. "I don't care who you are. You can go
     to blazes!" roared the angry voice. "To-morrow's the exam, and I
     won't be drawn by anyone."




     "A rude fellow," said our guide, flushing with anger as we withdrew
     down the stair. "Of course, he did not realize that it was I who was
     knocking, but none the less his conduct was very uncourteous, and,
     indeed, under the circumstances rather suspicious."




     Holmes's response was a curious one.




     "Can you tell me his exact height?" he asked.




     "Really, Mr. Holmes, I cannot undertake to say. He is taller than the
     Indian, not so tall as Gilchrist. I suppose five foot six would be
     about it."




     "That is very important," said Holmes. "And now, Mr. Soames, I wish
     you good-night."




     Our guide cried aloud in his astonishment and dismay. "Good gracious,
     Mr. Holmes, you are surely not going to leave me in this abrupt
     fashion! You don't seem to realize the position. To-morrow is the
     examination. I must take some definite action to-night. I cannot
     allow the examination to be held if one of the papers has been
     tampered with. The situation must be faced."




     "You must leave it as it is. I shall drop round early to-morrow
     morning and chat the matter over. It is possible that I may be in a
     position then to indicate some course of action. Meanwhile you change
     nothing--nothing at all."




     "Very good, Mr. Holmes."




     "You can be perfectly easy in your mind. We shall certainly find some
     way out of your difficulties. I will take the black clay with me,
     also the pencil cuttings. Good-bye."




     When we were out in the darkness of the quadrangle we again looked up
     at the windows. The Indian still paced his room. The others were
     invisible.




     "Well, Watson, what do you think of it?" Holmes asked, as we came out
     into the main street. "Quite a little parlour game--sort of
     three-card trick, is it not? There are your three men. It must be one
     of them. You take your choice. Which is yours?"




     "The foul-mouthed fellow at the top. He is the one with the worst
     record. And yet that Indian was a sly fellow also. Why should he be
     pacing his room all the time?"




     "There is nothing in that. Many men do it when they are trying to
     learn anything by heart."




     "He looked at us in a queer way."




     "So would you if a flock of strangers came in on you when you were
     preparing for an examination next day, and every moment was of value.
     No, I see nothing in that. Pencils, too, and knives--all was
     satisfactory. But that fellow does puzzle me."




     "Who?"




     "Why, Bannister, the servant. What's his game in the matter?"




     "He impressed me as being a perfectly honest man."




     "So he did me. That's the puzzling part. Why should a perfectly
     honest man--well, well, here's a large stationer's. We shall begin
     our researches here."




     There were only four stationers of any consequence in the town, and
     at each Holmes produced his pencil chips and bid high for a
     duplicate. All were agreed that one could be ordered, but that it was
     not a usual size of pencil and that it was seldom kept in stock. My
     friend did not appear to be depressed by his failure, but shrugged
     his shoulders in half-humorous resignation.




     "No good, my dear Watson. This, the best and only final clue, has run
     to nothing. But, indeed, I have little doubt that we can build up a
     sufficient case without it. By Jove! my dear fellow, it is nearly
     nine, and the landlady babbled of green peas at seven-thirty. What
     with your eternal tobacco, Watson, and your irregularity at meals, I
     expect that you will get notice to quit and that I shall share your
     downfall--not, however, before we have solved the problem of the
     nervous tutor, the careless servant, and the three enterprising
     students."




      Holmes made no further allusion to the matter that day, though he
     sat lost in thought for a long time after our belated dinner. At
     eight in the morning he came into my room just as I finished my
     toilet.




     "Well, Watson," said he, "it is time we went down to St. Luke's. Can
     you do without breakfast?"




     "Certainly."




     "Soames will be in a dreadful fidget until we are able to tell him
     something positive."




     "Have you anything positive to tell him?"




     "I think so."




     "You have formed a conclusion?"




     "Yes, my dear Watson; I have solved the mystery."




     "But what fresh evidence could you have got?"




     "Aha! It is not for nothing that I have turned myself out of bed at
     the untimely hour of six. I have put in two hours' hard work and
     covered at least five miles, with something to show for it. Look at
     that!"




     He held out his hand. On the palm were three little pyramids of
     black, doughy clay.




     "Why, Holmes, you had only two yesterday!"




     "And one more this morning. It is a fair argument that wherever No. 3
     came from is also the source of Nos. 1 and 2. Eh, Watson? Well, come
     along and put friend Soames out of his pain."




      The unfortunate tutor was certainly in a state of pitiable agitation
     when we found him in his chambers. In a few hours the examination
     would commence, and he was still in the dilemma between making the
     facts public and allowing the culprit to compete for the valuable
     scholarship. He could hardly stand still, so great was his mental
     agitation, and he ran towards Holmes with two eager hands
     outstretched.




     "Thank Heaven that you have come! I feared that you had given it up
     in despair. What am I to do? Shall the examination proceed?"




     "Yes; let it proceed by all means."




     "But this rascal--?"




     "He shall not compete."




     "You know him?"




     "I think so. If this matter is not to become public we must give
     ourselves certain powers, and resolve ourselves into a small private
     court-martial. You there, if you please, Soames! Watson, you here!
     I'll take the arm-chair in the middle. I think that we are now
     sufficiently imposing to strike terror into a guilty breast. Kindly
     ring the bell!"




     Bannister entered, and shrunk back in evident surprise and fear at
     our judicial appearance.




     "You will kindly close the door," said Holmes. "Now, Bannister, will
     you please tell us the truth about yesterday's incident?"




     The man turned white to the roots of his hair.




     "I have told you everything, sir."




     "Nothing to add?"




     "Nothing at all, sir."




     "Well, then, I must make some suggestions to you. When you sat down
     on that chair yesterday, did you do so in order to conceal some
     object which would have shown who had been in the room?"




     Bannister's face was ghastly.




     "No, sir; certainly not."




     "It is only a suggestion," said Holmes, suavely. "I frankly admit
     that I am unable to prove it. But it seems probable enough, since the
     moment that Mr. Soames's back was turned you released the man who was
     hiding in that bedroom."




     Bannister licked his dry lips.




     "There was no man, sir."




     "Ah, that's a pity, Bannister. Up to now you may have spoken the
     truth, but now I know that you have lied."




     The man's face set in sullen defiance.




     "There was no man, sir."




     "Come, come, Bannister!"




     "No, sir; there was no one."




     "In that case you can give us no further information. Would you
     please remain in the room? Stand over there near the bedroom door.
     Now, Soames, I am going to ask you to have the great kindness to go
     up to the room of young Gilchrist, and to ask him to step down into
     yours."




     An instant later the tutor returned, bringing with him the student.
     He was a fine figure of a man, tall, lithe, and agile, with a springy
     step and a pleasant, open face. His troubled blue eyes glanced at
     each of us, and finally rested with an expression of blank dismay
     upon Bannister in the farther corner.




     "Just close the door," said Holmes. "Now, Mr. Gilchrist, we are all
     quite alone here, and no one need ever know one word of what passes
     between us. We can be perfectly frank with each other. We want to
     know, Mr. Gilchrist, how you, an honourable man, ever came to commit
     such an action as that of yesterday?"




     The unfortunate young man staggered back and cast a look full of
     horror and reproach at Bannister.




     "No, no, Mr. Gilchrist, sir; I never said a word--never one word!"
     cried the servant.




     "No, but you have now," said Holmes. "Now, sir, you must see that
     after Bannister's words your position is hopeless, and that your only
     chance lies in a frank confession."




     For a moment Gilchrist, with upraised hand, tried to control his
     writhing features. The next he had thrown himself on his knees beside
     the table and, burying his face in his hands, he had burst into a
     storm of passionate sobbing.




     "Come, come," said Holmes, kindly; "it is human to err, and at least
     no one can accuse you of being a callous criminal. Perhaps it would
     be easier for you if I were to tell Mr. Soames what occurred, and you
     can check me where I am wrong. Shall I do so? Well, well, don't
     trouble to answer. Listen, and see that I do you no injustice.




     "From the moment, Mr. Soames, that you said to me that no one, not
     even Bannister, could have told that the papers were in your room,
     the case began to take a definite shape in my mind. The printer one
     could, of course, dismiss. He could examine the papers in his own
     office. The Indian I also thought nothing of. If the proofs were in a
     roll he could not possibly know what they were. On the other hand, it
     seemed an unthinkable coincidence that a man should dare to enter the
     room, and that by chance on that very day the papers were on the
     table. I dismissed that. The man who entered knew that the papers
     were there. How did he know?




     "When I approached your room I examined the window. You amused me by
     supposing that I was contemplating the possibility of someone having
     in broad daylight, under the eyes of all these opposite rooms, forced
     himself through it. Such an idea was absurd. I was measuring how tall
     a man would need to be in order to see as he passed what papers were
     on the central table. I am six feet high, and I could do it with an
     effort. No one less than that would have a chance. Already you see I
     had reason to think that if one of your three students was a man of
     unusual height he was the most worth watching of the three.




     "I entered and I took you into my confidence as to the suggestions of
     the side table. Of the centre table I could make nothing, until in
     your description of Gilchrist you mentioned that he was a
     long-distance jumper. Then the whole thing came to me in an instant,
     and I only needed certain corroborative proofs, which I speedily
     obtained.




     "What happened was this. This young fellow had employed his afternoon
     at the athletic grounds, where he had been practising the jump. He
     returned carrying his jumping shoes, which are provided, as you are
     aware, with several sharp spikes. As he passed your window he saw, by
     means of his great height, these proofs upon your table, and
     conjectured what they were. No harm would have been done had it not
     been that as he passed your door he perceived the key which had been
     left by the carelessness of your servant. A sudden impulse came over
     him to enter and see if they were indeed the proofs. It was not a
     dangerous exploit, for he could always pretend that he had simply
     looked in to ask a question.




     "Well, when he saw that they were indeed the proofs, it was then that
     he yielded to temptation. He put his shoes on the table. What was it
     you put on that chair near the window?"




     "Gloves," said the young man.




     Holmes looked triumphantly at Bannister. "He put his gloves on the
     chair, and he took the proofs, sheet by sheet, to copy them. He
     thought the tutor must return by the main gate, and that he would see
     him. As we know, he came back by the side gate. Suddenly he heard him
     at the very door. There was no possible escape. He forgot his gloves,
     but he caught up his shoes and darted into the bedroom. You observe
     that the scratch on that table is slight at one side, but deepens in
     the direction of the bedroom door. That in itself is enough to show
     us that the shoe had been drawn in that direction and that the
     culprit had taken refuge there. The earth round the spike had been
     left on the table, and a second sample was loosened and fell in the
     bedroom. I may add that I walked out to the athletic grounds this
     morning, saw that tenacious black clay is used in the jumping-pit,
     and carried away a specimen of it, together with some of the fine tan
     or sawdust which is strewn over it to prevent the athlete from
     slipping. Have I told the truth, Mr. Gilchrist?"




     The student had drawn himself erect.




     "Yes, sir, it is true," said he.




     "Good heavens, have you nothing to add?" cried Soames.




     "Yes, sir, I have, but the shock of this disgraceful exposure has
     bewildered me. I have a letter here, Mr. Soames, which I wrote to you
     early this morning in the middle of a restless night. It was before I
     knew that my sin had found me out. Here it is, sir. You will see that
     I have said, 'I have determined not to go in for the examination. I
     have been offered a commission in the Rhodesian Police, and I am
     going out to South Africa at once.'"




     "I am indeed pleased to hear that you did not intend to profit by
     your unfair advantage," said Soames. "But why did you change your
     purpose?"




     Gilchrist pointed to Bannister.




     "There is the man who set me in the right path," said he.




     "Come now, Bannister," said Holmes. "It will be clear to you from
     what I have said that only you could have let this young man out,
     since you were left in the room, and must have locked the door when
     you went out. As to his escaping by that window, it was incredible.
     Can you not clear up the last point in this mystery, and tell us the
     reasons for your action?"




     "It was simple enough, sir, if you only had known; but with all your
     cleverness it was impossible that you could know. Time was, sir, when
     I was butler to old Sir Jabez Gilchrist, this young gentleman's
     father. When he was ruined I came to the college as servant, but I
     never forgot my old employer because he was down in the world. I
     watched his son all I could for the sake of the old days. Well, sir,
     when I came into this room yesterday when the alarm was given, the
     very first thing I saw was Mr. Gilchrist's tan gloves a-lying in that
     chair. I knew those gloves well, and I understood their message. If
     Mr. Soames saw them the game was up. I flopped down into that chair,
     and nothing would budge me until Mr. Soames he went for you. Then out
     came my poor young master, whom I had dandled on my knee, and
     confessed it all to me. Wasn't it natural, sir, that I should save
     him, and wasn't it natural also that I should try to speak to him as
     his dead father would have done, and make him understand that he
     could not profit by such a deed? Could you blame me, sir?"




     "No, indeed," said Holmes, heartily, springing to his feet. "Well,
     Soames, I think we have cleared your little problem up, and our
     breakfast awaits us at home. Come, Watson! As to you, sir, I trust
     that a bright future awaits you in Rhodesia. For once you have fallen
     low. Let us see in the future how high you can rise."




    We have had some dramatic entrances and exits upon our small stage at
     Baker Street, but I cannot recollect anything more sudden and
     startling than the first appearance of Thorneycroft Huxtable, M.A.,
     Ph.D., etc. His card, which seemed too small to carry the weight of
     his academic distinctions, preceded him by a few seconds, and then he
     entered himself--so large, so pompous, and so dignified that he was
     the very embodiment of self-possession and solidity. And yet his
     first action when the door had closed behind him was to stagger
     against the table, whence he slipped down upon the floor, and there
     was that majestic figure prostrate and insensible upon our bearskin
     hearthrug.


     We had sprung to our feet, and for a few moments we stared in silent
     amazement at this ponderous piece of wreckage, which told of some
     sudden and fatal storm far out on the ocean of life. Then Holmes
     hurried with a cushion for his head and I with brandy for his lips.
     The heavy white face was seamed with lines of trouble, the hanging
     pouches under the closed eyes were leaden in colour, the loose mouth
     drooped dolorously at the corners, the rolling chins were unshaven.
     Collar and shirt bore the grime of a long journey, and the hair
     bristled unkempt from the well-shaped head. It was a sorely-stricken
     man who lay before us.


     "What is it, Watson?" asked Holmes.


     "Absolute exhaustion--possibly mere hunger and fatigue," said I, with
     my finger on the thready pulse, where the stream of life trickled
     thin and small.


     "Return ticket from Mackleton, in the North of England," said Holmes,
     drawing it from the watch-pocket. "It is not twelve o'clock yet. He
     has certainly been an early starter."


     The puckered eyelids had begun to quiver, and now a pair of vacant,
     grey eyes looked up at us. An instant later the man had scrambled on
     to his feet, his face crimson with shame.


     "Forgive this weakness, Mr. Holmes; I have been a little overwrought.
     Thank you, if I might have a glass of milk and a biscuit I have no
     doubt that I should be better. I came personally, Mr. Holmes, in
     order to ensure that you would return with me. I feared that no
     telegram would convince you of the absolute urgency of the case."


     "When you are quite restored--


     "I am quite well again. I cannot imagine how I came to be so weak. I
     wish you, Mr. Holmes, to come to Mackleton with me by the next
     train."


     My friend shook his head.


     "My colleague, Dr. Watson, could tell you that we are very busy at
     present. I am retained in this case of the Ferrers Documents, and the
     Abergavenny murder is coming up for trial. Only a very important
     issue could call me from London at present."


     "Important!" Our visitor threw up his hands. "Have you heard nothing
     of the abduction of the only son of the Duke of Holdernesse?"


     "What! the late Cabinet Minister?"


     "Exactly. We had tried to keep it out of the papers, but there was
     some rumour in the Globe last night. I thought it might have reached
     your ears."


     Holmes shot out his long, thin arm and picked out Volume "H" in his
     encyclopaedia of reference.


     "'Holdernesse, 6th Duke, K.G., P.C.'--half the alphabet! 'Baron
     Beverley, Earl of Carston'--dear me, what a list! 'Lord Lieutenant of
     Hallamshire since 1900. Married Edith, daughter of Sir Charles
     Appledore, 1888. Heir and only child, Lord Saltire. Owns about two
     hundred and fifty thousand acres. Minerals in Lancashire and Wales.
     Address: Carlton House Terrace; Holdernesse Hall, Hallamshire;
     Carston Castle, Bangor, Wales. Lord of the Admiralty, 1872; Chief
     Secretary of State for--' Well, well, this man is certainly one of
     the greatest subjects of the Crown!"


     "The greatest and perhaps the wealthiest. I am aware, Mr. Holmes,
     that you take a very high line in professional matters, and that you
     are prepared to work for the work's sake. I may tell you, however,
     that his Grace has already intimated that a cheque for five thousand
     pounds will be handed over to the person who can tell him where his
     son is, and another thousand to him who can name the man, or men, who
     have taken him."


     "It is a princely offer," said Holmes. "Watson, I think that we shall
     accompany Dr. Huxtable back to the North of England. And now, Dr.
     Huxtable, when you have consumed that milk you will kindly tell me
     what has happened, when it happened, how it happened, and, finally,
     what Dr. Thorneycroft Huxtable, of the Priory School, near Mackleton,
     has to do with the matter, and why he comes three days after an
     event--the state of your chin gives the date--to ask for my humble
     services."


     Our visitor had consumed his milk and biscuits. The light had come
     back to his eyes and the colour to his cheeks as he set himself with
     great vigour and lucidity to explain the situation.


     "I must inform you, gentlemen, that the Priory is a preparatory
     school, of which I am the founder and principal. 'Huxtable's
     Sidelights on Horace' may possibly recall my name to your memories.
     The Priory is, without exception, the best and most select
     preparatory school in England. Lord Leverstoke, the Earl of
     Blackwater, Sir Cathcart Soames--they all have entrusted their sons
     to me. But I felt that my school had reached its zenith when, three
     weeks ago, the Duke of Holdernesse sent Mr. James Wilder, his
     secretary, with the intimation that young Lord Saltire, ten years
     old, his only son and heir, was about to be committed to my charge.
     Little did I think that this would be the prelude to the most
     crushing misfortune of my life.


     "On May 1st the boy arrived, that being the beginning of the summer
     term. He was a charming youth, and he soon fell into our ways. I may
     tell you--I trust that I am not indiscreet, but half-confidences are
     absurd in such a case--that he was not entirely happy at home. It is
     an open secret that the Duke's married life had not been a peaceful
     one, and the matter had ended in a separation by mutual consent, the
     Duchess taking up her residence in the South of France. This had
     occurred very shortly before, and the boy's sympathies are known to
     have been strongly with his mother. He moped after her departure from
     Holdernesse Hall, and it was for this reason that the Duke desired to
     send him to my establishment. In a fortnight the boy was quite at
     home with us, and was apparently absolutely happy.


     "He was last seen on the night of May 13th--that is, the night of
     last Monday. His room was on the second floor, and was approached
     through another larger room in which two boys were sleeping. These
     boys saw and heard nothing, so that it is certain that young Saltire
     did not pass out that way. His window was open, and there is a stout
     ivy plant leading to the ground. We could trace no footmarks below,
     but it is sure that this is the only possible exit.


     "His absence was discovered at seven o'clock on Tuesday morning. His
     bed had been slept in. He had dressed himself fully before going off
     in his usual school suit of black Eton jacket and dark grey trousers.
     There were no signs that anyone had entered the room, and it is quite
     certain that anything in the nature of cries, or a struggle, would
     have been heard, since Caunter, the elder boy in the inner room, is a
     very light sleeper.


     "When Lord Saltire's disappearance was discovered I at once called a
     roll of the whole establishment, boys, masters, and servants. It was
     then that we ascertained that Lord Saltire had not been alone in his
     flight. Heidegger, the German master, was missing. His room was on
     the second floor, at the farther end of the building, facing the same
     way as Lord Saltire's. His bed had also been slept in; but he had
     apparently gone away partly dressed, since his shirt and socks were
     lying on the floor. He had undoubtedly let himself down by the ivy,
     for we could see the marks of his feet where he had landed on the
     lawn. His bicycle was kept in a small shed beside this lawn, and it
     also was gone.


     "He had been with me for two years, and came with the best
     references; but he was a silent, morose man, not very popular either
     with masters or boys. No trace could be found of the fugitives, and
     now on Thursday morning we are as ignorant as we were on Tuesday.
     Inquiry was, of course, made at once at Holdernesse Hall. It is only
     a few miles away, and we imagined that in some sudden attack of
     home-sickness he had gone back to his father; but nothing had been
     heard of him. The Duke is greatly agitated--and as to me, you have
     seen yourselves the state of nervous prostration to which the
     suspense and the responsibility have reduced me. Mr. Holmes, if ever
     you put forward your full powers, I implore you to do so now, for
     never in your life could you have a case which is more worthy of
     them."


     Sherlock Holmes had listened with the utmost intentness to the
     statement of the unhappy schoolmaster. His drawn brows and the deep
     furrow between them showed that he needed no exhortation to
     concentrate all his attention upon a problem which, apart from the
     tremendous interests involved, must appeal so directly to his love of
     the complex and the unusual. He now drew out his note-book and jotted
     down one or two memoranda.


     "You have been very remiss in not coming to me sooner," said he,
     severely. "You start me on my investigation with a very serious
     handicap. It is inconceivable, for example, that this ivy and this
     lawn would have yielded nothing to an expert observer."


     "I am not to blame, Mr. Holmes. His Grace was extremely desirous to
     avoid all public scandal. He was afraid of his family unhappiness
     being dragged before the world. He has a deep horror of anything of
     the kind."


     "But there has been some official investigation?"


     "Yes, sir, and it has proved most disappointing. An apparent clue was
     at once obtained, since a boy and a young man were reported to have
     been seen leaving a neighbouring station by an early train. Only last
     night we had news that the couple had been hunted down in Liverpool,
     and they prove to have no connection whatever with the matter in
     hand. Then it was that in my despair and disappointment, after a
     sleepless night, I came straight to you by the early train."


     "I suppose the local investigation was relaxed while this false clue
     was being followed up?"


     "It was entirely dropped."


     "So that three days have been wasted. The affair has been most
     deplorably handled."


     "I feel it, and admit it."


     "And yet the problem should be capable of ultimate solution. I shall
     be very happy to look into it. Have you been able to trace any
     connection between the missing boy and this German master?"


     "None at all."


     "Was he in the master's class?"


     "No; he never exchanged a word with him so far as I know."


     "That is certainly very singular. Had the boy a bicycle?"


     "No."


     "Was any other bicycle missing?"


     "No."


     "Is that certain?"


     "Quite."


     "Well, now, you do not mean to seriously suggest that this German
     rode off upon a bicycle in the dead of the night bearing the boy in
     his arms?"


     "Certainly not."


     "Then what is the theory in your mind?"


     "The bicycle may have been a blind. It may have been hidden somewhere
     and the pair gone off on foot."


     "Quite so; but it seems rather an absurd blind, does it not? Were
     there other bicycles in this shed?"


     "Several."


     "Would he not have hidden a couple he desired to give the idea that
     they had gone off upon them?"


     "I suppose he would."


     "Of course he would. The blind theory won't do. But the incident is
     an admirable starting-point for an investigation. After all, a
     bicycle is not an easy thing to conceal or to destroy. One other
     question. Did anyone call to see the boy on the day before he
     disappeared?"


     "No."


     "Did he get any letters?"


     "Yes; one letter."


     "From whom?"


     "From his father."


     "Do you open the boys' letters?"


     "No."


     "How do you know it was from the father?"


     "The coat of arms was on the envelope, and it was addressed in the
     Duke's peculiar stiff hand. Besides, the Duke remembers having
     written."


     "When had he a letter before that?"


     "Not for several days."


     "Had he ever one from France?"


     "No; never."


     "You see the point of my questions, of course. Either the boy was
     carried off by force or he went of his own free will. In the latter
     case you would expect that some prompting from outside would be
     needed to make so young a lad do such a thing. If he has had no
     visitors, that prompting must have come in letters. Hence I try to
     find out who were his correspondents."


     "I fear I cannot help you much. His only correspondent, so far as I
     know, was his own father."


     "Who wrote to him on the very day of his disappearance. Were the
     relations between father and son very friendly?"


     "His Grace is never very friendly with anyone. He is completely
     immersed in large public questions, and is rather inaccessible to all
     ordinary emotions. But he was always kind to the boy in his own way."


     "But the sympathies of the latter were with the mother?"


     "Yes."


     "Did he say so?"


     "No."


     "The Duke, then?"


     "Good heavens, no!"


     "Then how could you know?"


     "I have had some confidential talks with Mr. James Wilder, his
     Grace's secretary. It was he who gave me the information about Lord
     Saltire's feelings."


     "I see. By the way, that last letter of the Duke's--was it found in
     the boy's room after he was gone?"


     "No; he had taken it with him. I think, Mr. Holmes, it is time that
     we were leaving for Euston."


     "I will order a four-wheeler. In a quarter of an hour we shall be at
     your service. If you are telegraphing home, Mr. Huxtable, it would be
     well to allow the people in your neighbourhood to imagine that the
     inquiry is still going on in Liverpool, or wherever else that red
     herring led your pack. In the meantime I will do a little quiet work
     at your own doors, and perhaps the scent is not so cold but that two
     old hounds like Watson and myself may get a sniff of it."


     That evening found us in the cold, bracing atmosphere of the Peak
     country, in which Dr. Huxtable's famous school is situated. It was
     already dark when we reached it. A card was lying on the hall table,
     and the butler whispered something to his master, who turned to us
     with agitation in every heavy feature.


     "The Duke is here," said he. "The Duke and Mr. Wilder are in the
     study. Come, gentlemen, and I will introduce you."


     I was, of course, familiar with the pictures of the famous statesman,
     but the man himself was very different from his representation. He
     was a tall and stately person, scrupulously dressed, with a drawn,
     thin face, and a nose which was grotesquely curved and long. His
     complexion was of a dead pallor, which was more startling by contrast
     with a long, dwindling beard of vivid red, which flowed down over his
     white waistcoat, with his watch-chain gleaming through its fringe.
     Such was the stately presence who looked stonily at us from the
     centre of Dr. Huxtable's hearthrug. Beside him stood a very young
     man, whom I understood to be Wilder, the private secretary. He was
     small, nervous, alert, with intelligent, light-blue eyes and mobile
     features. It was he who at once, in an incisive and positive tone,
     opened the conversation.


     "I called this morning, Dr. Huxtable, too late to prevent you from
     starting for London. I learned that your object was to invite Mr.
     Sherlock Holmes to undertake the conduct of this case. His Grace is
     surprised, Dr. Huxtable, that you should have taken such a step
     without consulting him."


     "When I learned that the police had failed--"


     "His Grace is by no means convinced that the police have failed."


     "But surely, Mr. Wilder--"


     "You are well aware, Dr. Huxtable, that his Grace is particularly
     anxious to avoid all public scandal. He prefers to take as few people
     as possible into his confidence."


     "The matter can be easily remedied," said the brow-beaten doctor;
     "Mr. Sherlock Holmes can return to London by the morning train."


     "Hardly that, Doctor, hardly that," said Holmes, in his blandest
     voice. "This northern air is invigorating and pleasant, so I propose
     to spend a few days upon your moors, and to occupy my mind as best I
     may. Whether I have the shelter of your roof or of the village inn
     is, of course, for you to decide."


     I could see that the unfortunate doctor was in the last stage of
     indecision, from which he was rescued by the deep, sonorous voice of
     the red-bearded Duke, which boomed out like a dinner-gong.


     "I agree with Mr. Wilder, Dr. Huxtable, that you would have done
     wisely to consult me. But since Mr. Holmes has already been taken
     into your confidence, it would indeed be absurd that we should not
     avail ourselves of his services. Far from going to the inn, Mr.
     Holmes, I should be pleased if you would come and stay with me at
     Holdernesse Hall."


     "I thank your Grace. For the purposes of my investigation I think
     that it would be wiser for me to remain at the scene of the mystery."


     "Just as you like, Mr. Holmes. Any information which Mr. Wilder or I
     can give you is, of course, at your disposal."


     "It will probably be necessary for me to see you at the Hall," said
     Holmes. "I would only ask you now, sir, whether you have formed any
     explanation in your own mind as to the mysterious disappearance of
     your son?"


     "No, sir, I have not."


     "Excuse me if I allude to that which is painful to you, but I have no
     alternative. Do you think that the Duchess had anything to do with
     the matter?"


     The great Minister showed perceptible hesitation.


     "I do not think so," he said, at last.


     "The other most obvious explanation is that the child has been
     kidnapped for the purpose of levying ransom. You have not had any
     demand of the sort?"


     "No, sir."


     "One more question, your Grace. I understand that you wrote to your
     son upon the day when this incident occurred."


     "No; I wrote upon the day before."


     "Exactly. But he received it on that day?"


     "Yes."


     "Was there anything in your letter which might have unbalanced him or
     induced him to take such a step?"


     "No, sir, certainly not."


     "Did you post that letter yourself?"


     The nobleman's reply was interrupted by his secretary, who broke in
     with some heat.


     "His Grace is not in the habit of posting letters himself," said he.
     "This letter was laid with others upon the study table, and I myself
     put them in the post-bag."


     "You are sure this one was among them?"


     "Yes; I observed it."


     "How many letters did your Grace write that day?"


     "Twenty or thirty. I have a large correspondence. But surely this is
     somewhat irrelevant?"


     "Not entirely," said Holmes.


     "For my own part," the Duke continued, "I have advised the police to
     turn their attention to the South of France. I have already said that
     I do not believe that the Duchess would encourage so monstrous an
     action, but the lad had the most wrong-headed opinions, and it is
     possible that he may have fled to her, aided and abetted by this
     German. I think, Dr. Huxtable, that we will now return to the Hall."


     I could see that there were other questions which Holmes would have
     wished to put; but the nobleman's abrupt manner showed that the
     interview was at an end. It was evident that to his intensely
     aristocratic nature this discussion of his intimate family affairs
     with a stranger was most abhorrent, and that he feared lest every
     fresh question would throw a fiercer light into the discreetly
     shadowed corners of his ducal history.


     When the nobleman and his secretary had left, my friend flung himself
     at once with characteristic eagerness into the investigation.


     The boy's chamber was carefully examined, and yielded nothing save
     the absolute conviction that it was only through the window that he
     could have escaped. The German master's room and effects gave no
     further clue. In his case a trailer of ivy had given way under his
     weight, and we saw by the light of a lantern the mark on the lawn
     where his heels had come down. That one dint in the short green grass
     was the only material witness left of this inexplicable nocturnal
     flight.


     Sherlock Holmes left the house alone, and only returned after eleven.
     He had obtained a large ordnance map of the neighbourhood, and this
     he brought into my room, where he laid it out on the bed, and, having
     balanced the lamp in the middle of it, he began to smoke over it, and
     occasionally to point out objects of interest with the reeking amber
     of his pipe.


     "This case grows upon me, Watson," said he. "There are decidedly some
     points of interest in connection with it. In this early stage I want
     you to realize those geographical features which may have a good deal
     to do with our investigation.


     "Look at this map. This dark square is the Priory School. I'll put a
     pin in it. Now, this line is the main road. You see that it runs east
     and west past the school, and you see also that there is no side road
     for a mile either way. If these two folk passed away by road it was
     this road."


     [ Picture: Chart of the surrounding area ]


     "Exactly."


     "By a singular and happy chance we are able to some extent to check
     what passed along this road during the night in question. At this
     point, where my pipe is now resting, a country constable was on duty
     from twelve to six. It is, as you perceive, the first cross road on
     the east side. This man declares that he was not absent from his post
     for an instant, and he is positive that neither boy nor man could
     have gone that way unseen. I have spoken with this policeman
     to-night, and he appears to me to be a perfectly reliable person.
     That blocks this end. We have now to deal with the other. There is an
     inn here, the Red Bull, the landlady of which was ill. She had sent
     to Mackleton for a doctor, but he did not arrive until morning, being
     absent at another case. The people at the inn were alert all night,
     awaiting his coming, and one or other of them seems to have
     continually had an eye upon the road. They declare that no one
     passed. If their evidence is good, then we are fortunate enough to be
     able to block the west, and also to be able to say that the fugitives
     did not use the road at all."


     "But the bicycle?" I objected.


     "Quite so. We will come to the bicycle presently. To continue our
     reasoning: if these people did not go by the road, they must have
     traversed the country to the north of the house or to the south of
     the house. That is certain. Let us weigh the one against the other.
     On the south of the house is, as you perceive, a large district of
     arable land, cut up into small fields, with stone walls between them.
     There, I admit that a bicycle is impossible. We can dismiss the idea.
     We turn to the country on the north. Here there lies a grove of
     trees, marked as the 'Ragged Shaw,' and on the farther side stretches
     a great rolling moor, Lower Gill Moor, extending for ten miles and
     sloping gradually upwards. Here, at one side of this wilderness, is
     Holdernesse Hall, ten miles by road, but only six across the moor. It
     is a peculiarly desolate plain. A few moor farmers have small
     holdings, where they rear sheep and cattle. Except these, the plover
     and the curlew are the only inhabitants until you come to the
     Chesterfield high road. There is a church there, you see, a few
     cottages, and an inn. Beyond that the hills become precipitous.
     Surely it is here to the north that our quest must lie."


     "But the bicycle?" I persisted.


     "Well, well!" said Holmes, impatiently. "A good cyclist does not need
     a high road. The moor is intersected with paths and the moon was at
     the full. Halloa! what is this?"


     There was an agitated knock at the door, and an instant afterwards
     Dr. Huxtable was in the room. In his hand he held a blue cricket-cap,
     with a white chevron on the peak.


     "At last we have a clue!" he cried. "Thank Heaven! at last we are on
     the dear boy's track! It is his cap."


     "Where was it found?"


     "In the van of the gipsies who camped on the moor. They left on
     Tuesday. To-day the police traced them down and examined their
     caravan. This was found."


     "How do they account for it?"


     "They shuffled and lied--said that they found it on the moor on
     Tuesday morning. They know where he is, the rascals! Thank goodness,
     they are all safe under lock and key. Either the fear of the law or
     the Duke's purse will certainly get out of them all that they know."


     "So far, so good," said Holmes, when the doctor had at last left the
     room. "It at least bears out the theory that it is on the side of the
     Lower Gill Moor that we must hope for results. The police have really
     done nothing locally, save the arrest of these gipsies. Look here,
     Watson! There is a watercourse across the moor. You see it marked
     here in the map. In some parts it widens into a morass. This is
     particularly so in the region between Holdernesse Hall and the
     school. It is vain to look elsewhere for tracks in this dry weather;
     but at that point there is certainly a chance of some record being
     left. I will call you early to-morrow morning, and you and I will try
     if we can throw some little light upon the mystery."


     The day was just breaking when I woke to find the long, thin form of
     Holmes by my bedside. He was fully dressed, and had apparently
     already been out.


     "I have done the lawn and the bicycle shed," said he. "I have also
     had a ramble through the Ragged Shaw. Now, Watson, there is cocoa
     ready in the next room. I must beg you to hurry, for we have a great
     day before us."


     His eyes shone, and his cheek was flushed with the exhilaration of
     the master workman who sees his work lie ready before him. A very
     different Holmes, this active, alert man, from the introspective and
     pallid dreamer of Baker Street. I felt, as I looked upon that supple
     figure, alive with nervous energy, that it was indeed a strenuous day
     that awaited us.


     And yet it opened in the blackest disappointment. With high hopes we
     struck across the peaty, russet moor, intersected with a thousand
     sheep paths, until we came to the broad, light-green belt which
     marked the morass between us and Holdernesse. Certainly, if the lad
     had gone homewards, he must have passed this, and he could not pass
     it without leaving his traces. But no sign of him or the German could
     be seen. With a darkening face my friend strode along the margin,
     eagerly observant of every muddy stain upon the mossy surface.
     Sheep-marks there were in profusion, and at one place, some miles
     down, cows had left their tracks. Nothing more.


     "Check number one," said Holmes, looking gloomily over the rolling
     expanse of the moor. "There is another morass down yonder and a
     narrow neck between. Halloa! halloa! halloa! what have we here?"


     We had come on a small black ribbon of pathway. In the middle of it,
     clearly marked on the sodden soil, was the track of a bicycle.


     "Hurrah!" I cried. "We have it."


     But Holmes was shaking his head, and his face was puzzled and
     expectant rather than joyous.


     "A bicycle, certainly, but not the bicycle," said he. "I am familiar
     with forty-two different impressions left by tyres. This, as you
     perceive, is a Dunlop, with a patch upon the outer cover. Heidegger's
     tyres were Palmer's, leaving longitudinal stripes. Aveling, the
     mathematical master, was sure upon the point. Therefore, it is not
     Heidegger's track."


     "The boy's, then?"


     "Possibly, if we could prove a bicycle to have been in his
     possession. But this we have utterly failed to do. This track, as you
     perceive, was made by a rider who was going from the direction of the
     school."


     "Or towards it?"


     "No, no, my dear Watson. The more deeply sunk impression is, of
     course, the hind wheel, upon which the weight rests. You perceive
     several places where it has passed across and obliterated the more
     shallow mark of the front one. It was undoubtedly heading away from
     the school. It may or may not be connected with our inquiry, but we
     will follow it backwards before we go any farther."


     We did so, and at the end of a few hundred yards lost the tracks as
     we emerged from the boggy portion of the moor. Following the path
     backwards, we picked out another spot, where a spring trickled across
     it. Here, once again, was the mark of the bicycle, though nearly
     obliterated by the hoofs of cows. After that there was no sign, but
     the path ran right on into Ragged Shaw, the wood which backed on to
     the school. From this wood the cycle must have emerged. Holmes sat
     down on a boulder and rested his chin in his hands. I had smoked two
     cigarettes before he moved.


     "Well, well," said he, at last. "It is, of course, possible that a
     cunning man might change the tyre of his bicycle in order to leave
     unfamiliar tracks. A criminal who was capable of such a thought is a
     man whom I should be proud to do business with. We will leave this
     question undecided and hark back to our morass again, for we have
     left a good deal unexplored."


     We continued our systematic survey of the edge of the sodden portion
     of the moor, and soon our perseverance was gloriously rewarded. Right
     across the lower part of the bog lay a miry path. Holmes gave a cry
     of delight as he approached it. An impression like a fine bundle of
     telegraph wires ran down the centre of it. It was the Palmer tyre.


     "Here is Herr Heidegger, sure enough!" cried Holmes, exultantly. "My
     reasoning seems to have been pretty sound, Watson."


     "I congratulate you."


     "But we have a long way still to go. Kindly walk clear of the path.
     Now let us follow the trail. I fear that it will not lead very far."


     We found, however, as we advanced that this portion of the moor is
     intersected with soft patches, and, though we frequently lost sight
     of the track, we always succeeded in picking it up once more.


     "Do you observe," said Holmes, "that the rider is now undoubtedly
     forcing the pace? There can be no doubt of it. Look at this
     impression, where you get both tyres clear. The one is as deep as the
     other. That can only mean that the rider is throwing his weight on to
     the handle-bar, as a man does when he is sprinting. By Jove! he has
     had a fall."


     There was a broad, irregular smudge covering some yards of the track.
     Then there were a few footmarks, and the tyre reappeared once more.


     "A side-slip," I suggested.


     Holmes held up a crumpled branch of flowering gorse. To my horror I
     perceived that the yellow blossoms were all dabbled with crimson. On
     the path, too, and among the heather were dark stains of clotted
     blood.


     "Bad!" said Holmes. "Bad! Stand clear, Watson! Not an unnecessary
     footstep! What do I read here? He fell wounded, he stood up, he
     remounted, he proceeded. But there is no other track. Cattle on this
     side path. He was surely not gored by a bull? Impossible! But I see
     no traces of anyone else. We must push on, Watson. Surely with stains
     as well as the track to guide us he cannot escape us now."


     Our search was not a very long one. The tracks of the tyre began to
     curve fantastically upon the wet and shining path. Suddenly, as I
     looked ahead, the gleam of metal caught my eye from amid the thick
     gorse bushes. Out of them we dragged a bicycle, Palmer-tyred, one
     pedal bent, and the whole front of it horribly smeared and slobbered
     with blood. On the other side of the bushes a shoe was projecting. We
     ran round, and there lay the unfortunate rider. He was a tall man,
     full bearded, with spectacles, one glass of which had been knocked
     out. The cause of his death was a frightful blow upon the head, which
     had crushed in part of his skull. That he could have gone on after
     receiving such an injury said much for the vitality and courage of
     the man. He wore shoes, but no socks, and his open coat disclosed a
     night-shirt beneath it. It was undoubtedly the German master.


     Holmes turned the body over reverently, and examined it with great
     attention. He then sat in deep thought for a time, and I could see by
     his ruffled brow that this grim discovery had not, in his opinion,
     advanced us much in our inquiry.


     "It is a little difficult to know what to do, Watson," said he, at
     last. "My own inclinations are to push this inquiry on, for we have
     already lost so much time that we cannot afford to waste another
     hour. On the other hand, we are bound to inform the police of the
     discovery, and to see that this poor fellow's body is looked after."


     "I could take a note back."


     "But I need your company and assistance. Wait a bit! There is a
     fellow cutting peat up yonder. Bring him over here, and he will guide
     the police."


     I brought the peasant across, and Holmes dispatched the frightened
     man with a note to Dr. Huxtable.


     "Now, Watson," said he, "we have picked up two clues this morning.
     One is the bicycle with the Palmer tyre, and we see what that has led
     to. The other is the bicycle with the patched Dunlop. Before we start
     to investigate that, let us try to realize what we do know so as to
     make the most of it, and to separate the essential from the
     accidental."


     "First of all I wish to impress upon you that the boy certainly left
     of his own free will. He got down from his window and he went off,
     either alone or with someone. That is sure."


     I assented.


     "Well, now, let us turn to this unfortunate German master. The boy
     was fully dressed when he fled. Therefore, he foresaw what he would
     do. But the German went without his socks. He certainly acted on very
     short notice."


     "Undoubtedly."


     "Why did he go? Because, from his bedroom window, he saw the flight
     of the boy. Because he wished to overtake him and bring him back. He
     seized his bicycle, pursued the lad, and in pursuing him met his
     death."


     "So it would seem."


     "Now I come to the critical part of my argument. The natural action
     of a man in pursuing a little boy would be to run after him. He would
     know that he could overtake him. But the German does not do so. He
     turns to his bicycle. I am told that he was an excellent cyclist. He
     would not do this if he did not see that the boy had some swift means
     of escape."


     "The other bicycle."


     "Let us continue our reconstruction. He meets his death five miles
     from the school--not by a bullet, mark you, which even a lad might
     conceivably discharge, but by a savage blow dealt by a vigorous arm.
     The lad, then, had a companion in his flight. And the flight was a
     swift one, since it took five miles before an expert cyclist could
     overtake them. Yet we survey the ground round the scene of the
     tragedy. What do we find? A few cattle tracks, nothing more. I took a
     wide sweep round, and there is no path within fifty yards. Another
     cyclist could have had nothing to do with the actual murder. Nor were
     there any human footmarks."


     "Holmes," I cried, "this is impossible."


     "Admirable!" he said. "A most illuminating remark. It is impossible
     as I state it, and therefore I must in some respect have stated it
     wrong. Yet you saw for yourself. Can you suggest any fallacy?"


     "He could not have fractured his skull in a fall?"


     "In a morass, Watson?"


     "I am at my wit's end."


     "Tut, tut; we have solved some worse problems. At least we have
     plenty of material, if we can only use it. Come, then, and, having
     exhausted the Palmer, let us see what the Dunlop with the patched
     cover has to offer us."


     We picked up the track and followed it onwards for some distance; but
     soon the moor rose into a long, heather-tufted curve, and we left the
     watercourse behind us. No further help from tracks could be hoped
     for. At the spot where we saw the last of the Dunlop tyre it might
     equally have led to Holdernesse Hall, the stately towers of which
     rose some miles to our left, or to a low, grey village which lay in
     front of us, and marked the position of the Chesterfield high road.


     As we approached the forbidding and squalid inn, with the sign of a
     game-cock above the door, Holmes gave a sudden groan and clutched me
     by the shoulder to save himself from falling. He had had one of those
     violent strains of the ankle which leave a man helpless. With
     difficulty he limped up to the door, where a squat, dark, elderly man
     was smoking a black clay pipe.


     "How are you, Mr. Reuben Hayes?" said Holmes.


     "Who are you, and how do you get my name so pat?" the countryman
     answered, with a suspicious flash of a pair of cunning eyes.


     "Well, it's printed on the board above your head. It's easy to see a
     man who is master of his own house. I suppose you haven't such a
     thing as a carriage in your stables?"


     "No; I have not."


     "I can hardly put my foot to the ground."


     "Don't put it to the ground."


     "But I can't walk."


     "Well, then, hop."


     Mr. Reuben Hayes's manner was far from gracious, but Holmes took it
     with admirable good-humour.


     "Look here, my man," said he. "This is really rather an awkward fix
     for me. I don't mind how I get on."


     "Neither do I," said the morose landlord.


     "The matter is very important. I would offer you a sovereign for the
     use of a bicycle."


     The landlord pricked up his ears.


     "Where do you want to go?"


     "To Holdernesse Hall."


     "Pals of the Dook, I suppose?" said the landlord, surveying our
     mud-stained garments with ironical eyes.


     Holmes laughed good-naturedly.


     "He'll be glad to see us, anyhow."


     "Why?"


     "Because we bring him news of his lost son."


     The landlord gave a very visible start.


     "What, you're on his track?"


     "He has been heard of in Liverpool. They expect to get him every
     hour."


     Again a swift change passed over the heavy, unshaven face. His manner
     was suddenly genial.


     "I've less reason to wish the Dook well than most men," said he, "for
     I was his head coachman once, and cruel bad he treated me. It was him
     that sacked me without a character on the word of a lying
     corn-chandler. But I'm glad to hear that the young lord was heard of
     in Liverpool, and I'll help you to take the news to the Hall."


     "Thank you," said Holmes. "We'll have some food first. Then you can
     bring round the bicycle."


     "I haven't got a bicycle."


     Holmes held up a sovereign.


     "I tell you, man, that I haven't got one. I'll let you have two
     horses as far as the Hall."


     "Well, well," said Holmes, "we'll talk about it when we've had
     something to eat."


     When we were left alone in the stone-flagged kitchen it was
     astonishing how rapidly that sprained ankle recovered. It was nearly
     nightfall, and we had eaten nothing since early morning, so that we
     spent some time over our meal. Holmes was lost in thought, and once
     or twice he walked over to the window and stared earnestly out. It
     opened on to a squalid courtyard. In the far corner was a smithy,
     where a grimy lad was at work. On the other side were the stables.
     Holmes had sat down again after one of these excursions, when he
     suddenly sprang out of his chair with a loud exclamation.


     "By Heaven, Watson, I believe that I've got it!" he cried. "Yes, yes,
     it must be so. Watson, do you remember seeing any cow-tracks to-day?"


     "Yes, several."


     "Where?"


     "Well, everywhere. They were at the morass, and again on the path,
     and again near where poor Heidegger met his death."


     "Exactly. Well, now, Watson, how many cows did you see on the moor?"


     "I don't remember seeing any."


     "Strange, Watson, that we should see tracks all along our line, but
     never a cow on the whole moor; very strange, Watson, eh?"


     "Yes, it is strange."


     "Now, Watson, make an effort; throw your mind back! Can you see those
     tracks upon the path?"


     "Yes, I can."


     "Can you recall that the tracks were sometimes like that, Watson"--he
     arranged a number of bread-crumbs in this fashion--: : : : :--"and
     sometimes like this"--: ` : ` : ` : `--"and occasionally like
     this"--. ` . ` . ` . "Can you remember that?"


     "No, I cannot."


     "But I can. I could swear to it. However, we will go back at our
     leisure and verify it. What a blind beetle I have been not to draw my
     conclusion!"


     "And what is your conclusion?"


     "Only that it is a remarkable cow which walks, canters, and gallops.
     By George, Watson, it was no brain of a country publican that thought
     out such a blind as that! The coast seems to be clear, save for that
     lad in the smithy. Let us slip out and see what we can see."


     There were two rough-haired, unkempt horses in the tumble-down
     stable. Holmes raised the hind leg of one of them and laughed aloud.


     "Old shoes, but newly shod--old shoes, but new nails. This case
     deserves to be a classic. Let us go across to the smithy."


     The lad continued his work without regarding us. I saw Holmes's eye
     darting to right and left among the litter of iron and wood which was
     scattered about the floor. Suddenly, however, we heard a step behind
     us, and there was the landlord, his heavy eyebrows drawn over his
     savage eyes, his swarthy features convulsed with passion. He held a
     short, metal-headed stick in his hand, and he advanced in so menacing
     a fashion that I was right glad to feel the revolver in my pocket.


     "You infernal spies!" the man cried. "What are you doing there?"


     "Why, Mr. Reuben Hayes," said Holmes, coolly, "one might think that
     you were afraid of our finding something out."


     The man mastered himself with a violent effort, and his grim mouth
     loosened into a false laugh, which was more menacing than his frown.


     "You're welcome to all you can find out in my smithy," said he. "But
     look here, mister, I don't care for folk poking about my place
     without my leave, so the sooner you pay your score and get out of
     this the better I shall be pleased."


     "All right, Mr. Hayes--no harm meant," said Holmes. "We have been
     having a look at your horses, but I think I'll walk after all. It's
     not far, I believe."


     "Not more than two miles to the Hall gates. That's the road to the
     left." He watched us with sullen eyes until we had left his premises.


     We did not go very far along the road, for Holmes stopped the instant
     that the curve hid us from the landlord's view.


     "We were warm, as the children say, at that inn," said he. "I seem to
     grow colder every step that I take away from it. No, no; I can't
     possibly leave it."


     "I am convinced," said I, "that this Reuben Hayes knows all about it.
     A more self-evident villain I never saw."


     "Oh! he impressed you in that way, did he? There are the horses,
     there is the smithy. Yes, it is an interesting place, this Fighting
     Cock. I think we shall have another look at it in an unobtrusive
     way."


     A long, sloping hillside, dotted with grey limestone boulders,
     stretched behind us. We had turned off the road, and were making our
     way up the hill, when, looking in the direction of Holdernesse Hall,
     I saw a cyclist coming swiftly along.


     "Get down, Watson!" cried Holmes, with a heavy hand upon my shoulder.
     We had hardly sunk from view when the man flew past us on the road.
     Amid a rolling cloud of dust I caught a glimpse of a pale, agitated
     face--a face with horror in every lineament, the mouth open, the eyes
     staring wildly in front. It was like some strange caricature of the
     dapper James Wilder whom we had seen the night before.


     "The Duke's secretary!" cried Holmes. "Come, Watson, let us see what
     he does."


     We scrambled from rock to rock until in a few moments we had made our
     way to a point from which we could see the front door of the inn.
     Wilder's bicycle was leaning against the wall beside it. No one was
     moving about the house, nor could we catch a glimpse of any faces at
     the windows. Slowly the twilight crept down as the sun sank behind
     the high towers of Holdernesse Hall. Then in the gloom we saw the two
     side-lamps of a trap light up in the stable yard of the inn, and
     shortly afterwards heard the rattle of hoofs, as it wheeled out into
     the road and tore off at a furious pace in the direction of
     Chesterfield.


     "What do you make of that, Watson?" Holmes whispered.


     "It looks like a flight."


     "A single man in a dog-cart, so far as I could see. Well, it
     certainly was not Mr. James Wilder, for there he is at the door."


     A red square of light had sprung out of the darkness. In the middle
     of it was the black figure of the secretary, his head advanced,
     peering out into the night. It was evident that he was expecting
     someone. Then at last there were steps in the road, a second figure
     was visible for an instant against the light, the door shut, and all
     was black once more. Five minutes later a lamp was lit in a room upon
     the first floor.


     "It seems to be a curious class of custom that is done by the
     Fighting Cock," said Holmes.


     "The bar is on the other side."


     "Quite so. These are what one may call the private guests. Now, what
     in the world is Mr. James Wilder doing in that den at this hour of
     night, and who is the companion who comes to meet him there? Come,
     Watson, we must really take a risk and try to investigate this a
     little more closely."


     Together we stole down to the road and crept across to the door of
     the inn. The bicycle still leaned against the wall. Holmes struck a
     match and held it to the back wheel, and I heard him chuckle as the
     light fell upon a patched Dunlop tyre. Up above us was the lighted
     window.


     "I must have a peep through that, Watson. If you bend your back and
     support yourself upon the wall, I think that I can manage."


     An instant later his feet were on my shoulders. But he was hardly up
     before he was down again.


     "Come, my friend," said he, "our day's work has been quite long
     enough. I think that we have gathered all that we can. It's a long
     walk to the school, and the sooner we get started the better."


     He hardly opened his lips during that weary trudge across the moor,
     nor would he enter the school when he reached it, but went on to
     Mackleton Station, whence he could send some telegrams. Late at night
     I heard him consoling Dr. Huxtable, prostrated by the tragedy of his
     master's death, and later still he entered my room as alert and
     vigorous as he had been when he started in the morning. "All goes
     well, my friend," said he. "I promise that before to-morrow evening
     we shall have reached the solution of the mystery."


     At eleven o'clock next morning my friend and I were walking up the
     famous yew avenue of Holdernesse Hall. We were ushered through the
     magnificent Elizabethan doorway and into his Grace's study. There we
     found Mr. James Wilder, demure and courtly, but with some trace of
     that wild terror of the night before still lurking in his furtive
     eyes and in his twitching features.


     "You have come to see his Grace? I am sorry; but the fact is that the
     Duke is far from well. He has been very much upset by the tragic
     news. We received a telegram from Dr. Huxtable yesterday afternoon,
     which told us of your discovery."


     "I must see the Duke, Mr. Wilder."


     "But he is in his room."


     "Then I must go to his room."


     "I believe he is in his bed."


     "I will see him there."


     Holmes's cold and inexorable manner showed the secretary that it was
     useless to argue with him.


     "Very good, Mr. Holmes; I will tell him that you are here."


     After half an hour's delay the great nobleman appeared. His face was
     more cadaverous than ever, his shoulders had rounded, and he seemed
     to me to be an altogether older man than he had been the morning
     before. He greeted us with a stately courtesy and seated himself at
     his desk, his red beard streaming down on to the table.


     "Well, Mr. Holmes?" said he.


     But my friend's eyes were fixed upon the secretary, who stood by his
     master's chair.


     "I think, your Grace, that I could speak more freely in Mr. Wilder's
     absence."


     The man turned a shade paler and cast a malignant glance at Holmes.


     "If your Grace wishes--"


     "Yes, yes; you had better go. Now, Mr. Holmes, what have you to say?"


     My friend waited until the door had closed behind the retreating
     secretary.


     "The fact is, your Grace," said he, "that my colleague, Dr. Watson,
     and myself had an assurance from Dr. Huxtable that a reward had been
     offered in this case. I should like to have this confirmed from your
     own lips."


     "Certainly, Mr. Holmes."


     "It amounted, if I am correctly informed, to five thousand pounds to
     anyone who will tell you where your son is?"


     "Exactly."


     "And another thousand to the man who will name the person or persons
     who keep him in custody?"


     "Exactly."


     "Under the latter heading is included, no doubt, not only those who
     may have taken him away, but also those who conspire to keep him in
     his present position?"


     "Yes, yes," cried the Duke, impatiently. "If you do your work well,
     Mr. Sherlock Holmes, you will have no reason to complain of niggardly
     treatment."


     My friend rubbed his thin hands together with an appearance of
     avidity which was a surprise to me, who knew his frugal tastes.


     "I fancy that I see your Grace's cheque-book upon the table," said
     he. "I should be glad if you would make me out a cheque for six
     thousand pounds. It would be as well, perhaps, for you to cross it.
     The Capital and Counties Bank, Oxford Street branch, are my agents."


     His Grace sat very stern and upright in his chair, and looked stonily
     at my friend.


     "Is this a joke, Mr. Holmes? It is hardly a subject for pleasantry."


     "Not at all, your Grace. I was never more earnest in my life."


     "What do you mean, then?"


     "I mean that I have earned the reward. I know where your son is, and
     I know some, at least, of those who are holding him."


     The Duke's beard had turned more aggressively red than ever against
     his ghastly white face.


     "Where is he?" he gasped. 


     "He is, or was last night, at the Fighting Cock Inn, about two miles
     from your park gate."


     The Duke fell back in his chair.


     "And whom do you accuse?"


     Sherlock Holmes's answer was an astounding one. He stepped swiftly
     forward and touched the Duke upon the shoulder.


     "I accuse you," said he. "And now, your Grace, I'll trouble you for
     that cheque."


     Never shall I forget the Duke's appearance as he sprang up and clawed
     with his hands like one who is sinking into an abyss. Then, with an
     extraordinary effort of aristocratic self-command, he sat down and
     sank his face in his hands. It was some minutes before he spoke.


     "How much do you know?" he asked at last, without raising his head.


     "I saw you together last night."


     "Does anyone else besides your friend know?"


     "I have spoken to no one."


     The Duke took a pen in his quivering fingers and opened his
     cheque-book.


     "I shall be as good as my word, Mr. Holmes. I am about to write your
     cheque, however unwelcome the information which you have gained may
     be to me. When the offer was first made I little thought the turn
     which events might take. But you and your friend are men of
     discretion, Mr. Holmes?"


     "I hardly understand your Grace."


     "I must put it plainly, Mr. Holmes. If only you two know of this
     incident, there is no reason why it should go any farther. I think
     twelve thousand pounds is the sum that I owe you, is it not?"


     But Holmes smiled and shook his head.


     "I fear, your Grace, that matters can hardly be arranged so easily.
     There is the death of this schoolmaster to be accounted for."


     "But James knew nothing of that. You cannot hold him responsible for
     that. It was the work of this brutal ruffian whom he had the
     misfortune to employ."


     "I must take the view, your Grace, that when a man embarks upon a
     crime he is morally guilty of any other crime which may spring from
     it."


     "Morally, Mr. Holmes. No doubt you are right. But surely not in the
     eyes of the law. A man cannot be condemned for a murder at which he
     was not present, and which he loathes and abhors as much as you do.
     The instant that he heard of it he made a complete confession to me,
     so filled was he with horror and remorse. He lost not an hour in
     breaking entirely with the murderer. Oh, Mr. Holmes, you must save
     him--you must save him! I tell you that you must save him!" The Duke
     had dropped the last attempt at self-command, and was pacing the room
     with a convulsed face and with his clenched hands raving in the air.
     At last he mastered himself and sat down once more at his desk. "I
     appreciate your conduct in coming here before you spoke to anyone
     else," said he. "At least, we may take counsel how far we can
     minimize this hideous scandal."


     "Exactly," said Holmes. "I think, your Grace, that this can only be
     done by absolute and complete frankness between us. I am disposed to
     help your Grace to the best of my ability; but in order to do so I
     must understand to the last detail how the matter stands. I realize
     that your words applied to Mr. James Wilder, and that he is not the
     murderer."


     "No; the murderer has escaped."


     Sherlock Holmes smiled demurely.


     "Your Grace can hardly have heard of any small reputation which I
     possess, or you would not imagine that it is so easy to escape me.
     Mr. Reuben Hayes was arrested at Chesterfield on my information at
     eleven o'clock last night. I had a telegram from the head of the
     local police before I left the school this morning."


     The Duke leaned back in his chair and stared with amazement at my
     friend.


     "You seem to have powers that are hardly human," said he. "So Reuben
     Hayes is taken? I am right glad to hear it, if it will not react upon
     the fate of James."


     "Your secretary?"


     "No, sir; my son."


     It was Holmes's turn to look astonished.


     "I confess that this is entirely new to me, your Grace. I must beg
     you to be more explicit."


     "I will conceal nothing from you. I agree with you that complete
     frankness, however painful it may be to me, is the best policy in
     this desperate situation to which James's folly and jealousy have
     reduced us. When I was a very young man, Mr. Holmes, I loved with
     such a love as comes only once in a lifetime. I offered the lady
     marriage, but she refused it on the grounds that such a match might
     mar my career. Had she lived I would certainly never have married
     anyone else. She died, and left this one child, whom for her sake I
     have cherished and cared for. I could not acknowledge the paternity
     to the world; but I gave him the best of educations, and since he
     came to manhood I have kept him near my person. He surprised my
     secret, and has presumed ever since upon the claim which he has upon
     me and upon his power of provoking a scandal, which would be
     abhorrent to me. His presence had something to do with the unhappy
     issue of my marriage. Above all, he hated my young legitimate heir
     from the first with a persistent hatred. You may well ask me why,
     under these circumstances, I still kept James under my roof. I answer
     that it was because I could see his mother's face in his, and that
     for her dear sake there was no end to my long-suffering. All her
     pretty ways, too--there was not one of them which he could not
     suggest and bring back to my memory. I could not send him away. But I
     feared so much lest he should do Arthur--that is, Lord Saltire--a
     mischief that I dispatched him for safety to Dr. Huxtable's school.


     "James came into contact with this fellow Hayes because the man was a
     tenant of mine, and James acted as agent. The fellow was a rascal
     from the beginning; but in some extraordinary way James became
     intimate with him. He had always a taste for low company. When James
     determined to kidnap Lord Saltire it was of this man's service that
     he availed himself. You remember that I wrote to Arthur upon that
     last day. Well, James opened the letter and inserted a note asking
     Arthur to meet him in a little wood called the Ragged Shaw, which is
     near to the school. He used the Duchess's name, and in that way got
     the boy to come. That evening James bicycled over--I am telling you
     what he has himself confessed to me--and he told Arthur, whom he met
     in the wood, that his mother longed to see him, that she was awaiting
     him on the moor, and that if he would come back into the wood at
     midnight he would find a man with a horse, who would take him to her.
     Poor Arthur fell into the trap. He came to the appointment and found
     this fellow Hayes with a led pony. Arthur mounted, and they set off
     together. It appears--though this James only heard yesterday--that
     they were pursued, that Hayes struck the pursuer with his stick, and
     that the man died of his injuries. Hayes brought Arthur to his
     public-house, the Fighting Cock, where he was confined in an upper
     room, under the care of Mrs. Hayes, who is a kindly woman, but
     entirely under the control of her brutal husband.


     "Well, Mr. Holmes, that was the state of affairs when I first saw you
     two days ago. I had no more idea of the truth than you. You will ask
     me what was James's motive in doing such a deed. I answer that there
     was a great deal which was unreasoning and fanatical in the hatred
     which he bore my heir. In his view he should himself have been heir
     of all my estates, and he deeply resented those social laws which
     made it impossible. At the same time he had a definite motive also.
     He was eager that I should break the entail, and he was of opinion
     that it lay in my power to do so. He intended to make a bargain with
     me--to restore Arthur if I would break the entail, and so make it
     possible for the estate to be left to him by will. He knew well that
     I should never willingly invoke the aid of the police against him. I
     say that he would have proposed such a bargain to me, but he did not
     actually do so, for events moved too quickly for him, and he had not
     time to put his plans into practice.


     "What brought all his wicked scheme to wreck was your discovery of
     this man Heidegger's dead body. James was seized with horror at the
     news. It came to us yesterday as we sat together in this study. Dr.
     Huxtable had sent a telegram. James was so overwhelmed with grief and
     agitation that my suspicions, which had never been entirely absent,
     rose instantly to a certainty, and I taxed him with the deed. He made
     a complete voluntary confession. Then he implored me to keep his
     secret for three days longer, so as to give his wretched accomplice a
     chance of saving his guilty life. I yielded--as I have always
     yielded--to his prayers, and instantly James hurried off to the
     Fighting Cock to warn Hayes and give him the means of flight. I could
     not go there by daylight without provoking comment, but as soon as
     night fell I hurried off to see my dear Arthur. I found him safe and
     well, but horrified beyond expression by the dreadful deed he had
     witnessed. In deference to my promise, and much against my will, I
     consented to leave him there for three days under the charge of Mrs.
     Hayes, since it was evident that it was impossible to inform the
     police where he was without telling them also who was the murderer,
     and I could not see how that murderer could be punished without ruin
     to my unfortunate James. You asked for frankness, Mr. Holmes, and I
     have taken you at your word, for I have now told you everything
     without an attempt at circumlocution or concealment. Do you in turn
     be as frank with me."


     "I will," said Holmes. "In the first place, your Grace, I am bound to
     tell you that you have placed yourself in a most serious position in
     the eyes of the law. You have condoned a felony and you have aided
     the escape of a murderer; for I cannot doubt that any money which was
     taken by James Wilder to aid his accomplice in his flight came from
     your Grace's purse."


     The Duke bowed his assent.


     "This is indeed a most serious matter. Even more culpable in my
     opinion, your Grace, is your attitude towards your younger son. You
     leave him in this den for three days."


     "Under solemn promises--"


     "What are promises to such people as these? You have no guarantee
     that he will not be spirited away again. To humour your guilty elder
     son you have exposed your innocent younger son to imminent and
     unnecessary danger. It was a most unjustifiable action."


     The proud lord of Holdernesse was not accustomed to be so rated in
     his own ducal hall. The blood flushed into his high forehead, but his
     conscience held him dumb.


     "I will help you, but on one condition only. It is that you ring for
     the footman and let me give such orders as I like."


     Without a word the Duke pressed the electric bell. A servant entered.


     "You will be glad to hear," said Holmes, "that your young master is
     found. It is the Duke's desire that the carriage shall go at once to
     the Fighting Cock Inn to bring Lord Saltire home.


     "Now," said Holmes, when the rejoicing lackey had disappeared,
     "having secured the future, we can afford to be more lenient with the
     past. I am not in an official position, and there is no reason, so
     long as the ends of justice are served, why I should disclose all
     that I know. As to Hayes I say nothing. The gallows awaits him, and I
     would do nothing to save him from it. What he will divulge I cannot
     tell, but I have no doubt that your Grace could make him understand
     that it is to his interest to be silent. From the police point of
     view he will have kidnapped the boy for the purpose of ransom. If
     they do not themselves find it out I see no reason why I should
     prompt them to take a broader point of view. I would warn your Grace,
    however, that the continued presence of Mr. James Wilder in your
     household can only lead to misfortune."


     "I understand that, Mr. Holmes, and it is already settled that he
     shall leave me for ever and go to seek his fortune in Australia."


     "In that case, your Grace, since you have yourself stated that any
     unhappiness in your married life was caused by his presence, I would
     suggest that you make such amends as you can to the Duchess, and that
     you try to resume those relations which have been so unhappily
     interrupted."


     "That also I have arranged, Mr. Holmes. I wrote to the Duchess this
     morning."


     "In that case," said Holmes, rising, "I think that my friend and I
     can congratulate ourselves upon several most happy results from our
     little visit to the North. There is one other small point upon which
     I desire some light. This fellow Hayes had shod his horses with shoes
     which counterfeited the tracks of cows. Was it from Mr. Wilder that
     he learned so extraordinary a device?"


     The Duke stood in thought for a moment, with a look of intense
     surprise on his face. Then he opened a door and showed us into a
     large room furnished as a museum. He led the way to a glass case in a
     corner, and pointed to the inscription.


     "These shoes," it ran, "were dug up in the moat of Holdernesse Hall.
     They are for the use of horses; but they are shaped below with a
     cloven foot of iron, so as to throw pursuers off the track. They are
     supposed to have belonged to some of the marauding Barons of
     Holdernesse in the Middle Ages."


     Holmes opened the case, and moistening his finger he passed it along
     the shoe. A thin film of recent mud was left upon his skin.


     "Thank you," said he, as he replaced the glass. "It is the second
     most interesting object that I have seen in the North."


     "And the first?"


     Holmes folded up his cheque and placed it carefully in his note-book.
     "I am a poor man," said he, as he patted it affectionately and thrust
     it into the depths of his inner pocket.












                       THE ADVENTURE OF THE COPPER BEECHES


                               Arthur Conan Doyle






     "To the man who loves art for its own sake," remarked Sherlock
     Holmes, tossing aside the advertisement sheet of the Daily Telegraph,
     "it is frequently in its least important and lowliest manifestations
     that the keenest pleasure is to be derived. It is pleasant to me to
     observe, Watson, that you have so far grasped this truth that in
     these little records of our cases which you have been good enough to
     draw up, and, I am bound to say, occasionally to embellish, you have
     given prominence not so much to the many causes cÃ©lÃ¨bres and
     sensational trials in which I have figured but rather to those
     incidents which may have been trivial in themselves, but which have
     given room for those faculties of deduction and of logical synthesis
     which I have made my special province."


     "And yet," said I, smiling, "I cannot quite hold myself absolved from
     the charge of sensationalism which has been urged against my
     records."


     "You have erred, perhaps," he observed, taking up a glowing cinder
     with the tongs and lighting with it the long cherry-wood pipe which
     was wont to replace his clay when he was in a disputatious rather
     than a meditative mood--"you have erred perhaps in attempting to put
     colour and life into each of your statements instead of confining
     yourself to the task of placing upon record that severe reasoning
     from cause to effect which is really the only notable feature about
     the thing."


     "It seems to me that I have done you full justice in the matter," I
     remarked with some coldness, for I was repelled by the egotism which
     I had more than once observed to be a strong factor in my friend's
     singular character.


     "No, it is not selfishness or conceit," said he, answering, as was
     his wont, my thoughts rather than my words. "If I claim full justice
     for my art, it is because it is an impersonal thing--a thing beyond
     myself. Crime is common. Logic is rare. Therefore it is upon the
     logic rather than upon the crime that you should dwell. You have
     degraded what should have been a course of lectures into a series of
     tales."


     It was a cold morning of the early spring, and we sat after breakfast
     on either side of a cheery fire in the old room at Baker Street. A
     thick fog rolled down between the lines of dun-coloured houses, and
     the opposing windows loomed like dark, shapeless blurs through the
     heavy yellow wreaths. Our gas was lit and shone on the white cloth
     and glimmer of china and metal, for the table had not been cleared
     yet. Sherlock Holmes had been silent all the morning, dipping
     continuously into the advertisement columns of a succession of papers
     until at last, having apparently given up his search, he had emerged
     in no very sweet temper to lecture me upon my literary shortcomings.


     "At the same time," he remarked after a pause, during which he had
     sat puffing at his long pipe and gazing down into the fire, "you can
     hardly be open to a charge of sensationalism, for out of these cases
     which you have been so kind as to interest yourself in, a fair
     proportion do not treat of crime, in its legal sense, at all. The
     small matter in which I endeavoured to help the King of Bohemia, the
     singular experience of Miss Mary Sutherland, the problem connected
     with the man with the twisted lip, and the incident of the noble
     bachelor, were all matters which are outside the pale of the law. But
     in avoiding the sensational, I fear that you may have bordered on the
     trivial."


     "The end may have been so," I answered, "but the methods I hold to
     have been novel and of interest."


     "Pshaw, my dear fellow, what do the public, the great unobservant
     public, who could hardly tell a weaver by his tooth or a compositor
     by his left thumb, care about the finer shades of analysis and
     deduction! But, indeed, if you are trivial, I cannot blame you, for
     the days of the great cases are past. Man, or at least criminal man,
     has lost all enterprise and originality. As to my own little
     practice, it seems to be degenerating into an agency for recovering
     lost lead pencils and giving advice to young ladies from
     boarding-schools. I think that I have touched bottom at last,
     however. This note I had this morning marks my zero-point, I fancy.
     Read it!" He tossed a crumpled letter across to me.


     It was dated from Montague Place upon the preceding evening, and ran
     thus:


     Dear Mr. Holmes:
     I am very anxious to consult you as to whether I should or should not
     accept a situation which has been offered to me as governess. I shall
     call at half-past ten to-morrow if I do not inconvenience you.
     Yours faithfully,
     Violet Hunter.


     "Do you know the young lady?" I asked.


     "Not I."


     "It is half-past ten now."


     "Yes, and I have no doubt that is her ring."


     "It may turn out to be of more interest than you think. You remember
     that the affair of the blue carbuncle, which appeared to be a mere
     whim at first, developed into a serious investigation. It may be so
     in this case, also."


     "Well, let us hope so. But our doubts will very soon be solved, for
     here, unless I am much mistaken, is the person in question."


     As he spoke the door opened and a young lady entered the room. She
     was plainly but neatly dressed, with a bright, quick face, freckled
     like a plover's egg, and with the brisk manner of a woman who has had
     her own way to make in the world.


     "You will excuse my troubling you, I am sure," said she, as my
     companion rose to greet her, "but I have had a very strange
     experience, and as I have no parents or relations of any sort from
     whom I could ask advice, I thought that perhaps you would be kind
     enough to tell me what I should do."


     "Pray take a seat, Miss Hunter. I shall be happy to do anything that
     I can to serve you."


     I could see that Holmes was favourably impressed by the manner and
     speech of his new client. He looked her over in his searching
     fashion, and then composed himself, with his lids drooping and his
     finger-tips together, to listen to her story.


     "I have been a governess for five years," said she, "in the family of
     Colonel Spence Munro, but two months ago the colonel received an
     appointment at Halifax, in Nova Scotia, and took his children over to
     America with him, so that I found myself without a situation. I
     advertised, and I answered advertisements, but without success. At
     last the little money which I had saved began to run short, and I was
     at my wit's end as to what I should do.


     "There is a well-known agency for governesses in the West End called
     Westaway's, and there I used to call about once a week in order to
     see whether anything had turned up which might suit me. Westaway was
     the name of the founder of the business, but it is really managed by
     Miss Stoper. She sits in her own little office, and the ladies who
     are seeking employment wait in an anteroom, and are then shown in one
     by one, when she consults her ledgers and sees whether she has
     anything which would suit them.


     "Well, when I called last week I was shown into the little office as
     usual, but I found that Miss Stoper was not alone. A prodigiously
     stout man with a very smiling face and a great heavy chin which
     rolled down in fold upon fold over his throat sat at her elbow with a
     pair of glasses on his nose, looking very earnestly at the ladies who
     entered. As I came in he gave quite a jump in his chair and turned
     quickly to Miss Stoper.


     "'That will do,' said he; 'I could not ask for anything better.
     Capital! capital!' He seemed quite enthusiastic and rubbed his hands
     together in the most genial fashion. He was such a
     comfortable-looking man that it was quite a pleasure to look at him.


     "'You are looking for a situation, miss?' he asked.


     "'Yes, sir.'


     "'As governess?'


     "'Yes, sir.'


     "'And what salary do you ask?'


     "'I had Â£4 a month in my last place with Colonel Spence Munro.'


     "'Oh, tut, tut! sweating--rank sweating!' he cried, throwing his fat
     hands out into the air like a man who is in a boiling passion. 'How
     could anyone offer so pitiful a sum to a lady with such attractions
     and accomplishments?'


     "'My accomplishments, sir, may be less than you imagine,' said I. 'A
     little French, a little German, music, and drawing--'


     "'Tut, tut!' he cried. 'This is all quite beside the question. The
     point is, have you or have you not the bearing and deportment of a
     lady? There it is in a nutshell. If you have not, you are not fitted
     for the rearing of a child who may some day play a considerable part
     in the history of the country. But if you have why, then, how could
     any gentleman ask you to condescend to accept anything under the
     three figures? Your salary with me, madam, would commence at Â£100 a
     year.'


     "You may imagine, Mr. Holmes, that to me, destitute as I was, such an
     offer seemed almost too good to be true. The gentleman, however,
     seeing perhaps the look of incredulity upon my face, opened a
     pocket-book and took out a note.


     "'It is also my custom,' said he, smiling in the most pleasant
     fashion until his eyes were just two little shining slits amid the
     white creases of his face, 'to advance to my young ladies half their
     salary beforehand, so that they may meet any little expenses of their
     journey and their wardrobe.'


     "It seemed to me that I had never met so fascinating and so
     thoughtful a man. As I was already in debt to my tradesmen, the
     advance was a great convenience, and yet there was something
     unnatural about the whole transaction which made me wish to know a
     little more before I quite committed myself.


     "'May I ask where you live, sir?' said I.


     "'Hampshire. Charming rural place. The Copper Beeches, five miles on
     the far side of Winchester. It is the most lovely country, my dear
     young lady, and the dearest old country-house.'


     "'And my duties, sir? I should be glad to know what they would be.'


     "'One child--one dear little romper just six years old. Oh, if you
     could see him killing cockroaches with a slipper! Smack! smack!
     smack! Three gone before you could wink!' He leaned back in his chair
     and laughed his eyes into his head again.


     "I was a little startled at the nature of the child's amusement, but
     the father's laughter made me think that perhaps he was joking.


     "'My sole duties, then,' I asked, 'are to take charge of a single
     child?'


     "'No, no, not the sole, not the sole, my dear young lady,' he cried.
     'Your duty would be, as I am sure your good sense would suggest, to
     obey any little commands my wife might give, provided always that
     they were such commands as a lady might with propriety obey. You see
     no difficulty, heh?'


     "'I should be happy to make myself useful.'


     "'Quite so. In dress now, for example. We are faddy people, you
     know--faddy but kind-hearted. If you were asked to wear any dress
     which we might give you, you would not object to our little whim.
     Heh?'


     "'No,' said I, considerably astonished at his words.


     "'Or to sit here, or sit there, that would not be offensive to you?'


     "'Oh, no.'


     "'Or to cut your hair quite short before you come to us?'


     "I could hardly believe my ears. As you may observe, Mr. Holmes, my
     hair is somewhat luxuriant, and of a rather peculiar tint of
     chestnut. It has been considered artistic. I could not dream of
     sacrificing it in this offhand fashion.


     "'I am afraid that that is quite impossible,' said I. He had been
     watching me eagerly out of his small eyes, and I could see a shadow
     pass over his face as I spoke.


     "'I am afraid that it is quite essential,' said he. 'It is a little
     fancy of my wife's, and ladies' fancies, you know, madam, ladies'
     fancies must be consulted. And so you won't cut your hair?'


     "'No, sir, I really could not,' I answered firmly.


     "'Ah, very well; then that quite settles the matter. It is a pity,
     because in other respects you would really have done very nicely. In
     that case, Miss Stoper, I had best inspect a few more of your young
     ladies.'


     "The manageress had sat all this while busy with her papers without a
     word to either of us, but she glanced at me now with so much
     annoyance upon her face that I could not help suspecting that she had
     lost a handsome commission through my refusal.


     "'Do you desire your name to be kept upon the books?' she asked.


     "'If you please, Miss Stoper.'


     "'Well, really, it seems rather useless, since you refuse the most
     excellent offers in this fashion,' said she sharply. 'You can hardly
     expect us to exert ourselves to find another such opening for you.
     Good-day to you, Miss Hunter.' She struck a gong upon the table, and
     I was shown out by the page.


     "Well, Mr. Holmes, when I got back to my lodgings and found little
     enough in the cupboard, and two or three bills upon the table. I
     began to ask myself whether I had not done a very foolish thing.
     After all, if these people had strange fads and expected obedience on
     the most extraordinary matters, they were at least ready to pay for
     their eccentricity. Very few governesses in England are getting Â£100
     a year. Besides, what use was my hair to me? Many people are improved
     by wearing it short and perhaps I should be among the number. Next
     day I was inclined to think that I had made a mistake, and by the day
     after I was sure of it. I had almost overcome my pride so far as to
     go back to the agency and inquire whether the place was still open
     when I received this letter from the gentleman himself. I have it
     here and I will read it to you:


     "'The Copper Beeches, near Winchester.
     "'Dear Miss Hunter:
     "'Miss Stoper has very kindly given me your address, and I write from
     here to ask you whether you have reconsidered your decision. My wife
     is very anxious that you should come, for she has been much attracted
     by my description of you. We are willing to give Â£30 a quarter, or
     Â£120 a year, so as to recompense you for any little inconvenience
     which our fads may cause you. They are not very exacting, after all.
     My wife is fond of a particular shade of electric blue and would like
     you to wear such a dress indoors in the morning. You need not,
     however, go to the expense of purchasing one, as we have one
     belonging to my dear daughter Alice (now in Philadelphia), which
     would, I should think, fit you very well. Then, as to sitting here or
     there, or amusing yourself in any manner indicated, that need cause
     you no inconvenience. As regards your hair, it is no doubt a pity,
     especially as I could not help remarking its beauty during our short
     interview, but I am afraid that I must remain firm upon this point,
     and I only hope that the increased salary may recompense you for the
     loss. Your duties, as far as the child is concerned, are very light.
     Now do try to come, and I shall meet you with the dog-cart at
     Winchester. Let me know your train.
     "'Yours faithfully,
     "'Jephro Rucastle.'


     "That is the letter which I have just received, Mr. Holmes, and my
     mind is made up that I will accept it. I thought, however, that
     before taking the final step I should like to submit the whole matter
     to your consideration."


     "Well, Miss Hunter, if your mind is made up, that settles the
     question," said Holmes, smiling.


     "But you would not advise me to refuse?"


     "I confess that it is not the situation which I should like to see a
     sister of mine apply for."


     "What is the meaning of it all, Mr. Holmes?"


     "Ah, I have no data. I cannot tell. Perhaps you have yourself formed
     some opinion?"


     "Well, there seems to me to be only one possible solution. Mr.
     Rucastle seemed to be a very kind, good-natured man. Is it not
     possible that his wife is a lunatic, that he desires to keep the
     matter quiet for fear she should be taken to an asylum, and that he
     humours her fancies in every way in order to prevent an outbreak?"


     "That is a possible solution--in fact, as matters stand, it is the
     most probable one. But in any case it does not seem to be a nice
     household for a young lady."


     "But the money, Mr. Holmes, the money!"


     "Well, yes, of course the pay is good--too good. That is what makes
     me uneasy. Why should they give you Â£120 a year, when they could have
     their pick for Â£40? There must be some strong reason behind."


     "I thought that if I told you the circumstances you would understand
     afterwards if I wanted your help. I should feel so much stronger if I
     felt that you were at the back of me."


     "Oh, you may carry that feeling away with you. I assure you that your
     little problem promises to be the most interesting which has come my
     way for some months. There is something distinctly novel about some
     of the features. If you should find yourself in doubt or in danger--"


     "Danger! What danger do you foresee?"


     Holmes shook his head gravely. "It would cease to be a danger if we
     could define it," said he. "But at any time, day or night, a telegram
     would bring me down to your help."


     "That is enough." She rose briskly from her chair with the anxiety
     all swept from her face. "I shall go down to Hampshire quite easy in
     my mind now. I shall write to Mr. Rucastle at once, sacrifice my poor
     hair to-night, and start for Winchester to-morrow." With a few
     grateful words to Holmes she bade us both good-night and bustled off
     upon her way.


     "At least," said I as we heard her quick, firm steps descending the
     stairs, "she seems to be a young lady who is very well able to take
     care of herself."


     "And she would need to be," said Holmes gravely. "I am much mistaken
     if we do not hear from her before many days are past."


     It was not very long before my friend's prediction was fulfilled. A
     fortnight went by, during which I frequently found my thoughts
     turning in her direction and wondering what strange side-alley of
     human experience this lonely woman had strayed into. The unusual
     salary, the curious conditions, the light duties, all pointed to
     something abnormal, though whether a fad or a plot, or whether the
     man were a philanthropist or a villain, it was quite beyond my powers
     to determine. As to Holmes, I observed that he sat frequently for
     half an hour on end, with knitted brows and an abstracted air, but he
     swept the matter away with a wave of his hand when I mentioned it.
     "Data! data! data!" he cried impatiently. "I can't make bricks
     without clay." And yet he would always wind up by muttering that no
     sister of his should ever have accepted such a situation.


     The telegram which we eventually received came late one night just as
     I was thinking of turning in and Holmes was settling down to one of
     those all-night chemical researches which he frequently indulged in,
     when I would leave him stooping over a retort and a test-tube at
     night and find him in the same position when I came down to breakfast
     in the morning. He opened the yellow envelope, and then, glancing at
     the message, threw it across to me.


     "Just look up the trains in Bradshaw," said he, and turned back to
     his chemical studies.


     The summons was a brief and urgent one.


     Please be at the Black Swan Hotel at Winchester at midday to-morrow
     [it said]. Do come! I am at my wit's end.
     Hunter.


     "Will you come with me?" asked Holmes, glancing up.


     "I should wish to."


     "Just look it up, then."


     "There is a train at half-past nine," said I, glancing over my
     Bradshaw. "It is due at Winchester at 11.30."


     "That will do very nicely. Then perhaps I had better postpone my
     analysis of the acetones, as we may need to be at our best in the
     morning."


     By eleven o'clock the next day we were well upon our way to the old
     English capital. Holmes had been buried in the morning papers all the
     way down, but after we had passed the Hampshire border he threw them
     down and began to admire the scenery. It was an ideal spring day, a
     light blue sky, flecked with little fleecy white clouds drifting
     across from west to east. The sun was shining very brightly, and yet
     there was an exhilarating nip in the air, which set an edge to a
     man's energy. All over the countryside, away to the rolling hills
     around Aldershot, the little red and grey roofs of the farm-steadings
     peeped out from amid the light green of the new foliage.


     "Are they not fresh and beautiful?" I cried with all the enthusiasm
     of a man fresh from the fogs of Baker Street.


     But Holmes shook his head gravely.


     "Do you know, Watson," said he, "that it is one of the curses of a
     mind with a turn like mine that I must look at everything with
     reference to my own special subject. You look at these scattered
     houses, and you are impressed by their beauty. I look at them, and
     the only thought which comes to me is a feeling of their isolation
     and of the impunity with which crime may be committed there."


     "Good heavens!" I cried. "Who would associate crime with these dear
     old homesteads?"


     "They always fill me with a certain horror. It is my belief, Watson,
     founded upon my experience, that the lowest and vilest alleys in
     London do not present a more dreadful record of sin than does the
     smiling and beautiful countryside."


     "You horrify me!"


     "But the reason is very obvious. The pressure of public opinion can
     do in the town what the law cannot accomplish. There is no lane so
     vile that the scream of a tortured child, or the thud of a drunkard's
     blow, does not beget sympathy and indignation among the neighbours,
     and then the whole machinery of justice is ever so close that a word
     of complaint can set it going, and there is but a step between the
     crime and the dock. But look at these lonely houses, each in its own
     fields, filled for the most part with poor ignorant folk who know
     little of the law. Think of the deeds of hellish cruelty, the hidden
     wickedness which may go on, year in, year out, in such places, and
     none the wiser. Had this lady who appeals to us for help gone to live
     in Winchester, I should never have had a fear for her. It is the five
     miles of country which makes the danger. Still, it is clear that she
     is not personally threatened."


     "No. If she can come to Winchester to meet us she can get away."


     "Quite so. She has her freedom."


     "What can be the matter, then? Can you suggest no explanation?"


     "I have devised seven separate explanations, each of which would
     cover the facts as far as we know them. But which of these is correct
     can only be determined by the fresh information which we shall no
     doubt find waiting for us. Well, there is the tower of the cathedral,
     and we shall soon learn all that Miss Hunter has to tell."


     The Black Swan is an inn of repute in the High Street, at no distance
     from the station, and there we found the young lady waiting for us.
     She had engaged a sitting-room, and our lunch awaited us upon the
     table.


     "I am so delighted that you have come," she said earnestly. "It is so
     very kind of you both; but indeed I do not know what I should do.
     Your advice will be altogether invaluable to me."


     "Pray tell us what has happened to you."


     "I will do so, and I must be quick, for I have promised Mr. Rucastle
     to be back before three. I got his leave to come into town this
     morning, though he little knew for what purpose."


     "Let us have everything in its due order." Holmes thrust his long
     thin legs out towards the fire and composed himself to listen.


     "In the first place, I may say that I have met, on the whole, with no
     actual ill-treatment from Mr. and Mrs. Rucastle. It is only fair to
     them to say that. But I cannot understand them, and I am not easy in
     my mind about them."


     "What can you not understand?"


     "Their reasons for their conduct. But you shall have it all just as
     it occurred. When I came down, Mr. Rucastle met me here and drove me
     in his dog-cart to the Copper Beeches. It is, as he said, beautifully
     situated, but it is not beautiful in itself, for it is a large square
     block of a house, whitewashed, but all stained and streaked with damp
     and bad weather. There are grounds round it, woods on three sides,
     and on the fourth a field which slopes down to the Southampton
     highroad, which curves past about a hundred yards from the front
     door. This ground in front belongs to the house, but the woods all
     round are part of Lord Southerton's preserves. A clump of copper
     beeches immediately in front of the hall door has given its name to
     the place.


     "I was driven over by my employer, who was as amiable as ever, and
     was introduced by him that evening to his wife and the child. There
     was no truth, Mr. Holmes, in the conjecture which seemed to us to be
     probable in your rooms at Baker Street. Mrs. Rucastle is not mad. I
     found her to be a silent, pale-faced woman, much younger than her
     husband, not more than thirty, I should think, while he can hardly be
     less than forty-five. From their conversation I have gathered that
     they have been married about seven years, that he was a widower, and
     that his only child by the first wife was the daughter who has gone
     to Philadelphia. Mr. Rucastle told me in private that the reason why
     she had left them was that she had an unreasoning aversion to her
     stepmother. As the daughter could not have been less than twenty, I
     can quite imagine that her position must have been uncomfortable with
     her father's young wife.


     "Mrs. Rucastle seemed to me to be colourless in mind as well as in
     feature. She impressed me neither favourably nor the reverse. She was
     a nonentity. It was easy to see that she was passionately devoted
     both to her husband and to her little son. Her light grey eyes
     wandered continually from one to the other, noting every little want
     and forestalling it if possible. He was kind to her also in his
     bluff, boisterous fashion, and on the whole they seemed to be a happy
     couple. And yet she had some secret sorrow, this woman. She would
     often be lost in deep thought, with the saddest look upon her face.
     More than once I have surprised her in tears. I have thought
     sometimes that it was the disposition of her child which weighed upon
     her mind, for I have never met so utterly spoiled and so ill-natured
     a little creature. He is small for his age, with a head which is
     quite disproportionately large. His whole life appears to be spent in
     an alternation between savage fits of passion and gloomy intervals of
     sulking. Giving pain to any creature weaker than himself seems to be
     his one idea of amusement, and he shows quite remarkable talent in
     planning the capture of mice, little birds, and insects. But I would
     rather not talk about the creature, Mr. Holmes, and, indeed, he has
     little to do with my story."


     "I am glad of all details," remarked my friend, "whether they seem to
     you to be relevant or not."


     "I shall try not to miss anything of importance. The one unpleasant
     thing about the house, which struck me at once, was the appearance
     and conduct of the servants. There are only two, a man and his wife.
     Toller, for that is his name, is a rough, uncouth man, with grizzled
     hair and whiskers, and a perpetual smell of drink. Twice since I have
     been with them he has been quite drunk, and yet Mr. Rucastle seemed
     to take no notice of it. His wife is a very tall and strong woman
     with a sour face, as silent as Mrs. Rucastle and much less amiable.
     They are a most unpleasant couple, but fortunately I spend most of my
     time in the nursery and my own room, which are next to each other in
     one corner of the building.


     "For two days after my arrival at the Copper Beeches my life was very
     quiet; on the third, Mrs. Rucastle came down just after breakfast and
     whispered something to her husband.


     "'Oh, yes,' said he, turning to me, 'we are very much obliged to you,
     Miss Hunter, for falling in with our whims so far as to cut your
     hair. I assure you that it has not detracted in the tiniest iota from
     your appearance. We shall now see how the electric-blue dress will
     become you. You will find it laid out upon the bed in your room, and
     if you would be so good as to put it on we should both be extremely
     obliged.'


     "The dress which I found waiting for me was of a peculiar shade of
     blue. It was of excellent material, a sort of beige, but it bore
     unmistakable signs of having been worn before. It could not have been
     a better fit if I had been measured for it. Both Mr. and Mrs.
     Rucastle expressed a delight at the look of it, which seemed quite
     exaggerated in its vehemence. They were waiting for me in the
     drawing-room, which is a very large room, stretching along the entire
     front of the house, with three long windows reaching down to the
     floor. A chair had been placed close to the central window, with its
     back turned towards it. In this I was asked to sit, and then Mr.
     Rucastle, walking up and down on the other side of the room, began to
     tell me a series of the funniest stories that I have ever listened
     to. You cannot imagine how comical he was, and I laughed until I was
     quite weary. Mrs. Rucastle, however, who has evidently no sense of
     humour, never so much as smiled, but sat with her hands in her lap,
     and a sad, anxious look upon her face. After an hour or so, Mr.
     Rucastle suddenly remarked that it was time to commence the duties of
     the day, and that I might change my dress and go to little Edward in
     the nursery.


     "Two days later this same performance was gone through under exactly
     similar circumstances. Again I changed my dress, again I sat in the
     window, and again I laughed very heartily at the funny stories of
     which my employer had an immense rÃ©pertoire, and which he told
     inimitably. Then he handed me a yellow-backed novel, and moving my
     chair a little sideways, that my own shadow might not fall upon the
     page, he begged me to read aloud to him. I read for about ten
     minutes, beginning in the heart of a chapter, and then suddenly, in
     the middle of a sentence, he ordered me to cease and to change my
     dress.


     "You can easily imagine, Mr. Holmes, how curious I became as to what
     the meaning of this extraordinary performance could possibly be. They
     were always very careful, I observed, to turn my face away from the
     window, so that I became consumed with the desire to see what was
     going on behind my back. At first it seemed to be impossible, but I
     soon devised a means. My hand-mirror had been broken, so a happy
     thought seized me, and I concealed a piece of the glass in my
     handkerchief. On the next occasion, in the midst of my laughter, I
     put my handkerchief up to my eyes, and was able with a little
     management to see all that there was behind me. I confess that I was
     disappointed. There was nothing. At least that was my first
     impression. At the second glance, however, I perceived that there was
     a man standing in the Southampton Road, a small bearded man in a grey
     suit, who seemed to be looking in my direction. The road is an
     important highway, and there are usually people there. This man,
     however, was leaning against the railings which bordered our field
     and was looking earnestly up. I lowered my handkerchief and glanced
     at Mrs. Rucastle to find her eyes fixed upon me with a most searching
     gaze. She said nothing, but I am convinced that she had divined that
     I had a mirror in my hand and had seen what was behind me. She rose
     at once.


     "'Jephro,' said she, 'there is an impertinent fellow upon the road
     there who stares up at Miss Hunter.'


     "'No friend of yours, Miss Hunter?' he asked.


     "'No, I know no one in these parts.'


     "'Dear me! How very impertinent! Kindly turn round and motion to him
     to go away.'


     "'Surely it would be better to take no notice.'


     "'No, no, we should have him loitering here always. Kindly turn round
     and wave him away like that.'


     "I did as I was told, and at the same instant Mrs. Rucastle drew down
     the blind. That was a week ago, and from that time I have not sat
     again in the window, nor have I worn the blue dress, nor seen the man
     in the road."


     "Pray continue," said Holmes. "Your narrative promises to be a most
     interesting one."


     "You will find it rather disconnected, I fear, and there may prove to
     be little relation between the different incidents of which I speak.
     On the very first day that I was at the Copper Beeches, Mr. Rucastle
     took me to a small outhouse which stands near the kitchen door. As we
     approached it I heard the sharp rattling of a chain, and the sound as
     of a large animal moving about.


     "'Look in here!' said Mr. Rucastle, showing me a slit between two
     planks. 'Is he not a beauty?'


     "I looked through and was conscious of two glowing eyes, and of a
     vague figure huddled up in the darkness.


     "'Don't be frightened,' said my employer, laughing at the start which
     I had given. 'It's only Carlo, my mastiff. I call him mine, but
     really old Toller, my groom, is the only man who can do anything with
     him. We feed him once a day, and not too much then, so that he is
     always as keen as mustard. Toller lets him loose every night, and God
     help the trespasser whom he lays his fangs upon. For goodness' sake
     don't you ever on any pretext set your foot over the threshold at
     night, for it's as much as your life is worth.'


     "The warning was no idle one, for two nights later I happened to look
     out of my bedroom window about two o'clock in the morning. It was a
     beautiful moonlight night, and the lawn in front of the house was
     silvered over and almost as bright as day. I was standing, rapt in
     the peaceful beauty of the scene, when I was aware that something was
     moving under the shadow of the copper beeches. As it emerged into the
     moonshine I saw what it was. It was a giant dog, as large as a calf,
     tawny tinted, with hanging jowl, black muzzle, and huge projecting
     bones. It walked slowly across the lawn and vanished into the shadow
     upon the other side. That dreadful sentinel sent a chill to my heart
     which I do not think that any burglar could have done.


     "And now I have a very strange experience to tell you. I had, as you
     know, cut off my hair in London, and I had placed it in a great coil
     at the bottom of my trunk. One evening, after the child was in bed, I
     began to amuse myself by examining the furniture of my room and by
     rearranging my own little things. There was an old chest of drawers
     in the room, the two upper ones empty and open, the lower one locked.
     I had filled the first two with my linen, and as I had still much to
     pack away I was naturally annoyed at not having the use of the third
     drawer. It struck me that it might have been fastened by a mere
     oversight, so I took out my bunch of keys and tried to open it. The
     very first key fitted to perfection, and I drew the drawer open.
     There was only one thing in it, but I am sure that you would never
     guess what it was. It was my coil of hair.


     "I took it up and examined it. It was of the same peculiar tint, and
     the same thickness. But then the impossibility of the thing obtruded
     itself upon me. How could my hair have been locked in the drawer?
     With trembling hands I undid my trunk, turned out the contents, and
     drew from the bottom my own hair. I laid the two tresses together,
     and I assure you that they were identical. Was it not extraordinary?
     Puzzle as I would, I could make nothing at all of what it meant. I
     returned the strange hair to the drawer, and I said nothing of the
     matter to the Rucastles as I felt that I had put myself in the wrong
     by opening a drawer which they had locked.


     "I am naturally observant, as you may have remarked, Mr. Holmes, and
     I soon had a pretty good plan of the whole house in my head. There
     was one wing, however, which appeared not to be inhabited at all. A
     door which faced that which led into the quarters of the Tollers
     opened into this suite, but it was invariably locked. One day,
     however, as I ascended the stair, I met Mr. Rucastle coming out
     through this door, his keys in his hand, and a look on his face which
     made him a very different person to the round, jovial man to whom I
     was accustomed. His cheeks were red, his brow was all crinkled with
     anger, and the veins stood out at his temples with passion. He locked
     the door and hurried past me without a word or a look.


     "This aroused my curiosity, so when I went out for a walk in the
     grounds with my charge, I strolled round to the side from which I
     could see the windows of this part of the house. There were four of
     them in a row, three of which were simply dirty, while the fourth was
     shuttered up. They were evidently all deserted. As I strolled up and
     down, glancing at them occasionally, Mr. Rucastle came out to me,
     looking as merry and jovial as ever.


     "'Ah!' said he, 'you must not think me rude if I passed you without a
     word, my dear young lady. I was preoccupied with business matters.'


     "I assured him that I was not offended. 'By the way,' said I, 'you
     seem to have quite a suite of spare rooms up there, and one of them
     has the shutters up.'


     "He looked surprised and, as it seemed to me, a little startled at my
     remark.


     "'Photography is one of my hobbies,' said he. 'I have made my dark
     room up there. But, dear me! what an observant young lady we have
     come upon. Who would have believed it? Who would have ever believed
     it?' He spoke in a jesting tone, but there was no jest in his eyes as
     he looked at me. I read suspicion there and annoyance, but no jest.


     "Well, Mr. Holmes, from the moment that I understood that there was
     something about that suite of rooms which I was not to know, I was
     all on fire to go over them. It was not mere curiosity, though I have
     my share of that. It was more a feeling of duty--a feeling that some
     good might come from my penetrating to this place. They talk of
     woman's instinct; perhaps it was woman's instinct which gave me that
     feeling. At any rate, it was there, and I was keenly on the lookout
     for any chance to pass the forbidden door.


     "It was only yesterday that the chance came. I may tell you that,
     besides Mr. Rucastle, both Toller and his wife find something to do
     in these deserted rooms, and I once saw him carrying a large black
     linen bag with him through the door. Recently he has been drinking
     hard, and yesterday evening he was very drunk; and when I came
     upstairs there was the key in the door. I have no doubt at all that
     he had left it there. Mr. and Mrs. Rucastle were both downstairs, and
     the child was with them, so that I had an admirable opportunity. I
     turned the key gently in the lock, opened the door, and slipped
     through.


     "There was a little passage in front of me, unpapered and uncarpeted,
     which turned at a right angle at the farther end. Round this corner
     were three doors in a line, the first and third of which were open.
     They each led into an empty room, dusty and cheerless, with two
     windows in the one and one in the other, so thick with dirt that the
     evening light glimmered dimly through them. The centre door was
     closed, and across the outside of it had been fastened one of the
     broad bars of an iron bed, padlocked at one end to a ring in the
     wall, and fastened at the other with stout cord. The door itself was
     locked as well, and the key was not there. This barricaded door
     corresponded clearly with the shuttered window outside, and yet I
     could see by the glimmer from beneath it that the room was not in
     darkness. Evidently there was a skylight which let in light from
     above. As I stood in the passage gazing at the sinister door and
     wondering what secret it might veil, I suddenly heard the sound of
     steps within the room and saw a shadow pass backward and forward
     against the little slit of dim light which shone out from under the
     door. A mad, unreasoning terror rose up in me at the sight, Mr.
     Holmes. My overstrung nerves failed me suddenly, and I turned and
     ran--ran as though some dreadful hand were behind me clutching at the
     skirt of my dress. I rushed down the passage, through the door, and
     straight into the arms of Mr. Rucastle, who was waiting outside.


     "'So,' said he, smiling, 'it was you, then. I thought that it must be
     when I saw the door open.'


     "'Oh, I am so frightened!' I panted.


     "'My dear young lady! my dear young lady!'--you cannot think how
     caressing and soothing his manner was--'and what has frightened you,
     my dear young lady?'


     "But his voice was just a little too coaxing. He overdid it. I was
     keenly on my guard against him.


     "'I was foolish enough to go into the empty wing,' I answered. 'But
     it is so lonely and eerie in this dim light that I was frightened and
     ran out again. Oh, it is so dreadfully still in there!'


     "'Only that?' said he, looking at me keenly.


     "'Why, what did you think?' I asked.


     "'Why do you think that I lock this door?'


     "'I am sure that I do not know.'


     "'It is to keep people out who have no business there. Do you see?'
     He was still smiling in the most amiable manner.


     "'I am sure if I had known--'


     "'Well, then, you know now. And if you ever put your foot over that
     threshold again'--here in an instant the smile hardened into a grin
     of rage, and he glared down at me with the face of a demon--'I'll
     throw you to the mastiff.'


     "I was so terrified that I do not know what I did. I suppose that I
     must have rushed past him into my room. I remember nothing until I
     found myself lying on my bed trembling all over. Then I thought of
     you, Mr. Holmes. I could not live there longer without some advice. I
     was frightened of the house, of the man, of the woman, of the
     servants, even of the child. They were all horrible to me. If I could
     only bring you down all would be well. Of course I might have fled
     from the house, but my curiosity was almost as strong as my fears. My
     mind was soon made up. I would send you a wire. I put on my hat and
     cloak, went down to the office, which is about half a mile from the
     house, and then returned, feeling very much easier. A horrible doubt
     came into my mind as I approached the door lest the dog might be
     loose, but I remembered that Toller had drunk himself into a state of
     insensibility that evening, and I knew that he was the only one in
     the household who had any influence with the savage creature, or who
     would venture to set him free. I slipped in in safety and lay awake
     half the night in my joy at the thought of seeing you. I had no
     difficulty in getting leave to come into Winchester this morning, but
     I must be back before three o'clock, for Mr. and Mrs. Rucastle are
     going on a visit, and will be away all the evening, so that I must
     look after the child. Now I have told you all my adventures, Mr.
     Holmes, and I should be very glad if you could tell me what it all
     means, and, above all, what I should do."


     Holmes and I had listened spellbound to this extraordinary story. My
     friend rose now and paced up and down the room, his hands in his
     pockets, and an expression of the most profound gravity upon his
     face.


     "Is Toller still drunk?" he asked.


     "Yes. I heard his wife tell Mrs. Rucastle that she could do nothing
     with him."


     "That is well. And the Rucastles go out to-night?"


     "Yes."


     "Is there a cellar with a good strong lock?"


     "Yes, the wine-cellar."


     "You seem to me to have acted all through this matter like a very
     brave and sensible girl, Miss Hunter. Do you think that you could
     perform one more feat? I should not ask it of you if I did not think
     you a quite exceptional woman."


     "I will try. What is it?"


     "We shall be at the Copper Beeches by seven o'clock, my friend and I.
     The Rucastles will be gone by that time, and Toller will, we hope, be
     incapable. There only remains Mrs. Toller, who might give the alarm.
     If you could send her into the cellar on some errand, and then turn
     the key upon her, you would facilitate matters immensely."


     "I will do it."


     "Excellent! We shall then look thoroughly into the affair. Of course
     there is only one feasible explanation. You have been brought there
     to personate someone, and the real person is imprisoned in this
     chamber. That is obvious. As to who this prisoner is, I have no doubt
     that it is the daughter, Miss Alice Rucastle, if I remember right,
     who was said to have gone to America. You were chosen, doubtless, as
     resembling her in height, figure, and the colour of your hair. Hers
     had been cut off, very possibly in some illness through which she has
     passed, and so, of course, yours had to be sacrificed also. By a
     curious chance you came upon her tresses. The man in the road was
     undoubtedly some friend of hers--possibly her fiancÃ©--and no doubt,
     as you wore the girl's dress and were so like her, he was convinced
     from your laughter, whenever he saw you, and afterwards from your
     gesture, that Miss Rucastle was perfectly happy, and that she no
     longer desired his attentions. The dog is let loose at night to
     prevent him from endeavouring to communicate with her. So much is
     fairly clear. The most serious point in the case is the disposition
     of the child."


     "What on earth has that to do with it?" I ejaculated.


     "My dear Watson, you as a medical man are continually gaining light
     as to the tendencies of a child by the study of the parents. Don't
     you see that the converse is equally valid. I have frequently gained
     my first real insight into the character of parents by studying their
     children. This child's disposition is abnormally cruel, merely for
     cruelty's sake, and whether he derives this from his smiling father,
     as I should suspect, or from his mother, it bodes evil for the poor
     girl who is in their power."


     "I am sure that you are right, Mr. Holmes," cried our client. "A
     thousand things come back to me which make me certain that you have
     hit it. Oh, let us lose not an instant in bringing help to this poor
     creature."


     "We must be circumspect, for we are dealing with a very cunning man.
     We can do nothing until seven o'clock. At that hour we shall be with
     you, and it will not be long before we solve the mystery."


     We were as good as our word, for it was just seven when we reached
     the Copper Beeches, having put up our trap at a wayside public-house.
     The group of trees, with their dark leaves shining like burnished
     metal in the light of the setting sun, were sufficient to mark the
     house even had Miss Hunter not been standing smiling on the
     door-step.


     "Have you managed it?" asked Holmes.


     A loud thudding noise came from somewhere downstairs. "That is Mrs.
     Toller in the cellar," said she. "Her husband lies snoring on the
     kitchen rug. Here are his keys, which are the duplicates of Mr.
     Rucastle's."


     "You have done well indeed!" cried Holmes with enthusiasm. "Now lead
     the way, and we shall soon see the end of this black business."


     We passed up the stair, unlocked the door, followed on down a
     passage, and found ourselves in front of the barricade which Miss
     Hunter had described. Holmes cut the cord and removed the transverse
     bar. Then he tried the various keys in the lock, but without success.
     No sound came from within, and at the silence Holmes' face clouded
     over.


     "I trust that we are not too late," said he. "I think, Miss Hunter,
     that we had better go in without you. Now, Watson, put your shoulder
     to it, and we shall see whether we cannot make our way in."


     It was an old rickety door and gave at once before our united
     strength. Together we rushed into the room. It was empty. There was
     no furniture save a little pallet bed, a small table, and a basketful
     of linen. The skylight above was open, and the prisoner gone.


     "There has been some villainy here," said Holmes; "this beauty has
     guessed Miss Hunter's intentions and has carried his victim off."


     "But how?"


     "Through the skylight. We shall soon see how he managed it." He swung
     himself up onto the roof. "Ah, yes," he cried, "here's the end of a
     long light ladder against the eaves. That is how he did it."


     "But it is impossible," said Miss Hunter; "the ladder was not there
     when the Rucastles went away."


     "He has come back and done it. I tell you that he is a clever and
     dangerous man. I should not be very much surprised if this were he
     whose step I hear now upon the stair. I think, Watson, that it would
     be as well for you to have your pistol ready."


     The words were hardly out of his mouth before a man appeared at the
     door of the room, a very fat and burly man, with a heavy stick in his
     hand. Miss Hunter screamed and shrunk against the wall at the sight
     of him, but Sherlock Holmes sprang forward and confronted him.


     "You villain!" said he, "where's your daughter?"


     The fat man cast his eyes round, and then up at the open skylight.


     "It is for me to ask you that," he shrieked, "you thieves! Spies and
     thieves! I have caught you, have I? You are in my power. I'll serve
     you!" He turned and clattered down the stairs as hard as he could go.


     "He's gone for the dog!" cried Miss Hunter.


     "I have my revolver," said I.


     "Better close the front door," cried Holmes, and we all rushed down
     the stairs together. We had hardly reached the hall when we heard the
     baying of a hound, and then a scream of agony, with a horrible
     worrying sound which it was dreadful to listen to. An elderly man
     with a red face and shaking limbs came staggering out at a side door.


     "My God!" he cried. "Someone has loosed the dog. It's not been fed
     for two days. Quick, quick, or it'll be too late!"


     Holmes and I rushed out and round the angle of the house, with Toller
     hurrying behind us. There was the huge famished brute, its black
     muzzle buried in Rucastle's throat, while he writhed and screamed
     upon the ground. Running up, I blew its brains out, and it fell over
     with its keen white teeth still meeting in the great creases of his
     neck. With much labour we separated them and carried him, living but
     horribly mangled, into the house. We laid him upon the drawing-room
     sofa, and having dispatched the sobered Toller to bear the news to
     his wife, I did what I could to relieve his pain. We were all
     assembled round him when the door opened, and a tall, gaunt woman
     entered the room.


     "Mrs. Toller!" cried Miss Hunter.


     "Yes, miss. Mr. Rucastle let me out when he came back before he went
     up to you. Ah, miss, it is a pity you didn't let me know what you
     were planning, for I would have told you that your pains were
     wasted."


     "Ha!" said Holmes, looking keenly at her. "It is clear that Mrs.
     Toller knows more about this matter than anyone else."


     "Yes, sir, I do, and I am ready enough to tell what I know."


     "Then, pray, sit down, and let us hear it for there are several
     points on which I must confess that I am still in the dark."


     "I will soon make it clear to you," said she; "and I'd have done so
     before now if I could ha' got out from the cellar. If there's
     police-court business over this, you'll remember that I was the one
     that stood your friend, and that I was Miss Alice's friend too.


     "She was never happy at home, Miss Alice wasn't, from the time that
     her father married again. She was slighted like and had no say in
     anything, but it never really became bad for her until after she met
     Mr. Fowler at a friend's house. As well as I could learn, Miss Alice
     had rights of her own by will, but she was so quiet and patient, she
     was, that she never said a word about them but just left everything
     in Mr. Rucastle's hands. He knew he was safe with her; but when there
     was a chance of a husband coming forward, who would ask for all that
     the law would give him, then her father thought it time to put a stop
     on it. He wanted her to sign a paper, so that whether she married or
     not, he could use her money. When she wouldn't do it, he kept on
     worrying her until she got brain-fever, and for six weeks was at
     death's door. Then she got better at last, all worn to a shadow, and
     with her beautiful hair cut off; but that didn't make no change in
     her young man, and he stuck to her as true as man could be."


     "Ah," said Holmes, "I think that what you have been good enough to
     tell us makes the matter fairly clear, and that I can deduce all that
     remains. Mr. Rucastle then, I presume, took to this system of
     imprisonment?"


     "Yes, sir."


     "And brought Miss Hunter down from London in order to get rid of the
     disagreeable persistence of Mr. Fowler."


     "That was it, sir."


     "But Mr. Fowler being a persevering man, as a good seaman should be,
     blockaded the house, and having met you succeeded by certain
     arguments, metallic or otherwise, in convincing you that your
     interests were the same as his."


     "Mr. Fowler was a very kind-spoken, free-handed gentleman," said Mrs.
     Toller serenely.


     "And in this way he managed that your good man should have no want of
     drink, and that a ladder should be ready at the moment when your
     master had gone out."


     "You have it, sir, just as it happened."


     "I am sure we owe you an apology, Mrs. Toller," said Holmes, "for you
     have certainly cleared up everything which puzzled us. And here comes
     the country surgeon and Mrs. Rucastle, so I think, Watson, that we
     had best escort Miss Hunter back to Winchester, as it seems to me
     that our locus standi now is rather a questionable one."


     And thus was solved the mystery of the sinister house with the copper
     beeches in front of the door. Mr. Rucastle survived, but was always a
     broken man, kept alive solely through the care of his devoted wife.
     They still live with their old servants, who probably know so much of
     Rucastle's past life that he finds it difficult to part from them.
     Mr. Fowler and Miss Rucastle were married, by special license, in
     Southampton the day after their flight, and he is now the holder of a
     government appointment in the island of Mauritius. As to Miss Violet
     Hunter, my friend Holmes, rather to my disappointment, manifested no
     further interest in her when once she had ceased to be the centre of
     one of his problems, and she is now the head of a private school at
     Walsall, where I believe that she has met with considerable success.






















                                THE NAVAL TREATY


                               Arthur Conan Doyle






     The July which immediately succeeded my marriage was made memorable
     by three cases of interest, in which I had the privilege of being
     associated with Sherlock Holmes and of studying his methods. I find
     them recorded in my notes under the headings of "The Adventure of the
     Second Stain," "The Adventure of the Naval Treaty," and "The
     Adventure of the Tired Captain." The first of these, however, deals
     with interest of such importance and implicates so many of the first
     families in the kingdom that for many years it will be impossible to
     make it public. No case, however, in which Holmes was engaged has
     ever illustrated the value of his analytical methods so clearly or
     has impressed those who were associated with him so deeply. I still
     retain an almost verbatim report of the interview in which he
     demonstrated the true facts of the case to Monsieur Dubugue of the
     Paris police, and Fritz von Waldbaum, the well-known specialist of
     Dantzig, both of whom had wasted their energies upon what proved to
     be side-issues. The new century will have come, however, before the
     story can be safely told. Meanwhile I pass on to the second on my
     list, which promised also at one time to be of national importance,
     and was marked by several incidents which give it a quite unique
     character.


     During my school-days I had been intimately associated with a lad
     named Percy Phelps, who was of much the same age as myself, though he
     was two classes ahead of me. He was a very brilliant boy, and carried
     away every prize which the school had to offer, finishing his
     exploits by winning a scholarship which sent him on to continue his
     triumphant career at Cambridge. He was, I remember, extremely well
     connected, and even when we were all little boys together we knew
     that his mother's brother was Lord Holdhurst, the great conservative
     politician. This gaudy relationship did him little good at school. On
     the contrary, it seemed rather a piquant thing to us to chevy him
     about the playground and hit him over the shins with a wicket. But it
     was another thing when he came out into the world. I heard vaguely
     that his abilities and the influences which he commanded had won him
     a good position at the Foreign Office, and then he passed completely
     out of my mind until the following letter recalled his existence:


     Briarbrae, Woking.
     My dear Watson:
     I have no doubt that you can remember "Tadpole" Phelps, who was in
     the fifth form when you were in the third. It is possible even that
     you may have heard that through my uncle's influence I obtained a
     good appointment at the Foreign Office, and that I was in a situation
     of trust and honor until a horrible misfortune came suddenly to blast
     my career.
     There is no use writing of the details of that dreadful event. In the
     event of your acceding to my request it is probable that I shall have
     to narrate them to you. I have only just recovered from nine weeks of
     brain-fever, and am still exceedingly weak. Do you think that you
     could bring your friend Mr. Holmes down to see me? I should like to
     have his opinion of the case, though the authorities assure me that
     nothing more can be done. Do try to bring him down, and as soon as
     possible. Every minute seems an hour while I live in this state of
     horrible suspense. Assure him that if I have not asked his advice
     sooner it was not because I did not appreciate his talents, but
     because I have been off my head ever since the blow fell. Now I am
     clear again, though I dare not think of it too much for fear of a
     relapse. I am still so weak that I have to write, as you see, by
     dictating. Do try to bring him.
     Your old school-fellow,
     Percy Phelps.


     There was something that touched me as I read this letter, something
     pitiable in the reiterated appeals to bring Holmes. So moved was I
     that even had it been a difficult matter I should have tried it, but
     of course I knew well that Holmes loved his art, so that he was ever
     as ready to bring his aid as his client could be to receive it. My
     wife agreed with me that not a moment should be lost in laying the
     matter before him, and so within an hour of breakfast-time I found
     myself back once more in the old rooms in Baker Street.


     Holmes was seated at his side-table clad in his dressing-gown, and
     working hard over a chemical investigation. A large curved retort was
     boiling furiously in the bluish flame of a Bunsen burner, and the
     distilled drops were condensing into a two-litre measure. My friend
     hardly glanced up as I entered, and I, seeing that his investigation
     must be of importance, seated myself in an arm-chair and waited. He
     dipped into this bottle or that, drawing out a few drops of each with
     his glass pipette, and finally brought a test-tube containing a
     solution over to the table. In his right hand he held a slip of
     litmus-paper.


     "You come at a crisis, Watson," said he. "If this paper remains blue,
     all is well. If it turns red, it means a man's life." He dipped it
     into the test-tube and it flushed at once into a dull, dirty crimson.
     "Hum! I thought as much!" he cried. "I will be at your service in an
     instant, Watson. You will find tobacco in the Persian slipper." He
     turned to his desk and scribbled off several telegrams, which were
     handed over to the page-boy. Then he threw himself down into the
     chair opposite, and drew up his knees until his fingers clasped round
     his long, thin shins.


     "A very commonplace little murder," said he. "You've got something
     better, I fancy. You are the stormy petrel of crime, Watson. What is
     it?"


     I handed him the letter, which he read with the most concentrated
     attention.


     "It does not tell us very much, does it?" he remarked, as he handed
     it back to me.


     "Hardly anything."


     "And yet the writing is of interest."


     "But the writing is not his own."


     "Precisely. It is a woman's."


     "A man's surely," I cried.


     "No, a woman's, and a woman of rare character. You see, at the
     commencement of an investigation it is something to know that your
     client is in close contact with some one who, for good or evil, has
     an exceptional nature. My interest is already awakened in the case.
     If you are ready we will start at once for Woking, and see this
     diplomatist who is in such evil case, and the lady to whom he
     dictates his letters."


     We were fortunate enough to catch an early train at Waterloo, and in
     a little under an hour we found ourselves among the fir-woods and the
     heather of Woking. Briarbrae proved to be a large detached house
     standing in extensive grounds within a few minutes' walk of the
     station. On sending in our cards we were shown into an elegantly
     appointed drawing-room, where we were joined in a few minutes by a
     rather stout man who received us with much hospitality. His age may
     have been nearer forty than thirty, but his cheeks were so ruddy and
     his eyes so merry that he still conveyed the impression of a plump
     and mischievous boy.


     "I am so glad that you have come," said he, shaking our hands with
     effusion. "Percy has been inquiring for you all morning. Ah, poor old
     chap, he clings to any straw! His father and his mother asked me to
     see you, for the mere mention of the subject is very painful to
     them."


     "We have had no details yet," observed Holmes. "I perceive that you
     are not yourself a member of the family."


     Our acquaintance looked surprised, and then, glancing down, he began
     to laugh.


     "Of course you saw the J H monogram on my locket," said he. "For a
     moment I thought you had done something clever. Joseph Harrison is my
     name, and as Percy is to marry my sister Annie I shall at least be a
     relation by marriage. You will find my sister in his room, for she
     has nursed him hand-and-foot this two months back. Perhaps we'd
     better go in at once, for I know how impatient he is."


     The chamber in which we were shown was on the same floor as the
     drawing-room. It was furnished partly as a sitting and partly as a
     bedroom, with flowers arranged daintily in every nook and corner. A
     young man, very pale and worn, was lying upon a sofa near the open
     window, through which came the rich scent of the garden and the balmy
     summer air. A woman was sitting beside him, who rose as we entered.


     "Shall I leave, Percy?" she asked.


     He clutched her hand to detain her. "How are you, Watson?" said he,
     cordially. "I should never have known you under that moustache, and I
     dare say you would not be prepared to swear to me. This I presume is
     your celebrated friend, Mr. Sherlock Holmes?"


     I introduced him in a few words, and we both sat down. The stout
     young man had left us, but his sister still remained with her hand in
     that of the invalid. She was a striking-looking woman, a little short
     and thick for symmetry, but with a beautiful olive complexion, large,
     dark, Italian eyes, and a wealth of deep black hair. Her rich tints
     made the white face of her companion the more worn and haggard by the
     contrast.


     "I won't waste your time," said he, raising himself upon the sofa.
     "I'll plunge into the matter without further preamble. I was a happy
     and successful man, Mr. Holmes, and on the eve of being married, when
     a sudden and dreadful misfortune wrecked all my prospects in life.


     "I was, as Watson may have told you, in the Foreign Office, and
     through the influences of my uncle, Lord Holdhurst, I rose rapidly to
     a responsible position. When my uncle became foreign minister in this
     administration he gave me several missions of trust, and as I always
     brought them to a successful conclusion, he came at last to have the
     utmost confidence in my ability and tact.


     "Nearly ten weeks ago--to be more accurate, on the twenty-third of
     May--he called me into his private room, and, after complimenting me
     on the good work which I had done, he informed me that he had a new
     commission of trust for me to execute.


     "'This,' said he, taking a gray roll of paper from his bureau, 'is
     the original of that secret treaty between England and Italy of
     which, I regret to say, some rumors have already got into the public
     press. It is of enormous importance that nothing further should leak
     out. The French or the Russian embassy would pay an immense sum to
     learn the contents of these papers. They should not leave my bureau
     were it not that it is absolutely necessary to have them copied. You
     have a desk in your office?'


     "'Yes, sir.'


     "'Then take the treaty and lock it up there. I shall give directions
     that you may remain behind when the others go, so that you may copy
     it at your leisure without fear of being overlooked. When you have
     finished, relock both the original and the draft in the desk, and
     hand them over to me personally to-morrow morning.'


     "I took the papers and--"


     "Excuse me an instant," said Holmes. "Were you alone during this
     conversation?"


     "Absolutely."


     "In a large room?"


     "Thirty feet each way."


     "In the centre?"


     "Yes, about it."


     "And speaking low?"


     "My uncle's voice is always remarkably low. I hardly spoke at all."


     "Thank you," said Holmes, shutting his eyes; "pray go on."


     "I did exactly what he indicated, and waited until the other clerks
     had departed. One of them in my room, Charles Gorot, had some arrears
     of work to make up, so I left him there and went out to dine. When I
     returned he was gone. I was anxious to hurry my work, for I knew that
     Joseph--the Mr. Harrison whom you saw just now--was in town, and that
     he would travel down to Woking by the eleven-o'clock train, and I
     wanted if possible to catch it.


     "When I came to examine the treaty I saw at once that it was of such
     importance that my uncle had been guilty of no exaggeration in what
     he had said. Without going into details, I may say that it defined
     the position of Great Britain towards the Triple Alliance, and
     fore-shadowed the policy which this country would pursue in the event
     of the French fleet gaining a complete ascendancy over that of Italy
     in the Mediterranean. The questions treated in it were purely naval.
     At the end were the signatures of the high dignitaries who had signed
     it. I glanced my eyes over it, and then settled down to my task of
     copying.


     "It was a long document, written in the French language, and
     containing twenty-six separate articles. I copied as quickly as I
     could, but at nine o'clock I had only done nine articles, and it
     seemed hopeless for me to attempt to catch my train. I was feeling
     drowsy and stupid, partly from my dinner and also from the effects of
     a long day's work. A cup of coffee would clear my brain. A
     commissionaire remains all night in a little lodge at the foot of the
     stairs, and is in the habit of making coffee at his spirit-lamp for
     any of the officials who may be working over time. I rang the bell,
     therefore, to summon him.


     "To my surprise, it was a woman who answered the summons, a large,
     coarse-faced, elderly woman, in an apron. She explained that she was
     the commissionaire's wife, who did the charing, and I gave her the
     order for the coffee.


     "I wrote two more articles and then, feeling more drowsy than ever, I
     rose and walked up and down the room to stretch my legs. My coffee
     had not yet come, and I wondered what was the cause of the delay
     could be. Opening the door, I started down the corridor to find out.
     There was a straight passage, dimly lighted, which led from the room
     in which I had been working, and was the only exit from it. It ended
     in a curving staircase, with the commissionaire's lodge in the
     passage at the bottom. Half way down this staircase is a small
     landing, with another passage running into it at right angles. This
     second one leads by means of a second small stair to a side door,
     used by servants, and also as a short cut by clerks when coming from
     Charles Street. Here is a rough chart of the place."


     "Thank you. I think that I quite follow you," said Sherlock Holmes.


     "It is of the utmost importance that you should notice this point. I
     went down the stairs and into the hall, where I found the
     commissionaire fast asleep in his box, with the kettle boiling
     furiously upon the spirit-lamp. I took off the kettle and blew out
     the lamp, for the water was spurting over the floor. Then I put out
     my hand and was about to shake the man, who was still sleeping
     soundly, when a bell over his head rang loudly, and he woke with a
     start.


     "'Mr. Phelps, sir!' said he, looking at me in bewilderment.


     "'I came down to see if my coffee was ready.'


     "'I was boiling the kettle when I fell asleep, sir.' He looked at me
     and then up at the still quivering bell with an ever-growing
     astonishment upon his face.


     "'If you was here, sir, then who rang the bell?' he asked.


     "'The bell!' I cried. 'What bell is it?'


     "'It's the bell of the room you were working in.'


     "A cold hand seemed to close round my heart. Some one, then, was in
     that room where my precious treaty lay upon the table. I ran
     frantically up the stair and along the passage. There was no one in
     the corridors, Mr. Holmes. There was no one in the room. All was
     exactly as I left it, save only that the papers which had been
     committed to my care had been taken from the desk on which they lay.
     The copy was there, and the original was gone."


     Holmes sat up in his chair and rubbed his hands. I could see that the
     problem was entirely to his heart. "Pray, what did you do then?" he
     murmured.


     "I recognized in an instant that the thief must have come up the
     stairs from the side door. Of course I must have met him if he had
     come the other way."


     "You were satisfied that he could not have been concealed in the room
     all the time, or in the corridor which you have just described as
     dimly lighted?"


     "It is absolutely impossible. A rat could not conceal himself either
     in the room or the corridor. There is no cover at all."


     "Thank you. Pray proceed."


     "The commissionaire, seeing by my pale face that something was to be
     feared, had followed me upstairs. Now we both rushed along the
     corridor and down the steep steps which led to Charles Street. The
     door at the bottom was closed, but unlocked. We flung it open and
     rushed out. I can distinctly remember that as we did so there came
     three chimes from a neighboring clock. It was quarter to ten."


     "That is of enormous importance," said Holmes, making a note upon his
     shirt-cuff.


     "The night was very dark, and a thin, warm rain was falling. There
     was no one in Charles Street, but a great traffic was going on, as
     usual, in Whitehall, at the extremity. We rushed along the pavement,
     bare-headed as we were, and at the far corner we found a policeman
     standing.


     "'A robbery has been committed,' I gasped. 'A document of immense
     value has been stolen from the Foreign Office. Has any one passed
     this way?'


     "'I have been standing here for a quarter of an hour, sir,' said he;
     'only one person has passed during that time--a woman, tall and
     elderly, with a Paisley shawl.'


     "'Ah, that is only my wife,' cried the commissionaire; 'has no one
     else passed?'


     "'No one.'


     "'Then it must be the other way that the thief took,' cried the
     fellow, tugging at my sleeve.


     "But I was not satisfied, and the attempts which he made to draw me
     away increased my suspicions.


     "'Which way did the woman go?' I cried.


     "'I don't know, sir. I noticed her pass, but I had no special reason
     for watching her. She seemed to be in a hurry.'


     "'How long ago was it?'


     "'Oh, not very many minutes.'


     "'Within the last five?'


     "'Well, it could not be more than five.'


     "'You're only wasting your time, sir, and every minute now is of
     importance,' cried the commissionaire; 'take my word for it that my
     old woman has nothing to do with it, and come down to the other end
     of the street. Well, if you won't, I will.' And with that he rushed
     off in the other direction.


     "But I was after him in an instant and caught him by the sleeve.


     "'Where do you live?' said I.


     "'16 Ivy Lane, Brixton,' he answered. 'But don't let yourself be
     drawn away upon a false scent, Mr. Phelps. Come to the other end of
     the street and let us see if we can hear of anything.'


     "Nothing was to be lost by following his advice. With the policeman
     we both hurried down, but only to find the street full of traffic,
     many people coming and going, but all only too eager to get to a
     place of safety upon so wet a night. There was no lounger who could
     tell us who had passed.


     "Then we returned to the office, and searched the stairs and the
     passage without result. The corridor which led to the room was laid
     down with a kind of creamy linoleum which shows an impression very
     easily. We examined it very carefully, but found no outline of any
     footmark."


     "Had it been raining all evening?"


     "Since about seven."


     "How is it, then, that the woman who came into the room about nine
     left no traces with her muddy boots?"


     "I am glad you raised the point. It occurred to me at the time. The
     charwomen are in the habit of taking off their boots at the
     commissionaire's office, and putting on list slippers."


     "That is very clear. There were no marks, then, though the night was
     a wet one? The chain of events is certainly one of extraordinary
     interest. What did you do next?"


     "We examined the room also. There is no possibility of a secret door,
     and the windows are quite thirty feet from the ground. Both of them
     were fastened on the inside. The carpet prevents any possibility of a
     trap-door, and the ceiling is of the ordinary whitewashed kind. I
     will pledge my life that whoever stole my papers could only have come
     through the door."


     "How about the fireplace?"


     "They use none. There is a stove. The bell-rope hangs from the wire
     just to the right of my desk. Whoever rang it must have come right up
     to the desk to do it. But why should any criminal wish to ring the
     bell? It is a most insoluble mystery."


     "Certainly the incident was unusual. What were your next steps? You
     examined the room, I presume, to see if the intruder had left any
     traces--any cigar-end or dropped glove or hairpin or other trifle?"


     "There was nothing of the sort."


     "No smell?"


     "Well, we never thought of that."


     "Ah, a scent of tobacco would have been worth a great deal to us in
     such an investigation."


     "I never smoke myself, so I think I should have observed it if there
     had been any smell of tobacco. There was absolutely no clue of any
     kind. The only tangible fact was that the commissionaire's wife--Mrs.
     Tangey was the name--had hurried out of the place. He could give no
     explanation save that it was about the time when the woman always
     went home. The policeman and I agreed that our best plan would be to
     seize the woman before she could get rid of the papers, presuming
     that she had them.


     "The alarm had reached Scotland Yard by this time, and Mr. Forbes,
     the detective, came round at once and took up the case with a great
     deal of energy. We hired a hansom, and in half an hour we were at the
     address which had been given to us. A young woman opened the door,
     who proved to be Mrs. Tangey's eldest daughter. Her mother had not
     come back yet, and we were shown into the front room to wait.


     "About ten minutes later a knock came at the door, and here we made
     the one serious mistake for which I blame myself. Instead of opening
     the door ourselves, we allowed the girl to do so. We heard her say,
     'Mother, there are two men in the house waiting to see you,' and an
     instant afterwards we heard the patter of feet rushing down the
     passage. Forbes flung open the door, and we both ran into the back
     room or kitchen, but the woman had got there before us. She stared at
     us with defiant eyes, and then, suddenly recognizing me, an
     expression of absolute astonishment came over her face.


     "'Why, if it isn't Mr. Phelps, of the office!' she cried.


     "'Come, come, who did you think we were when you ran away from us?'
     asked my companion.


     "'I thought you were the brokers,' said she, 'we have had some
     trouble with a tradesman.'


     "'That's not quite good enough,' answered Forbes. 'We have reason to
     believe that you have taken a paper of importance from the Foreign
     Office, and that you ran in here to dispose of it. You must come back
     with us to Scotland Yard to be searched.'


     "It was in vain that she protested and resisted. A four-wheeler was
     brought, and we all three drove back in it. We had first made an
     examination of the kitchen, and especially of the kitchen fire, to
     see whether she might have made away with the papers during the
     instant that she was alone. There were no signs, however, of any
     ashes or scraps. When we reached Scotland Yard she was handed over at
     once to the female searcher. I waited in an agony of suspense until
     she came back with her report. There were no signs of the papers.


     "Then for the first time the horror of my situation came in its full
     force. Hitherto I had been acting, and action had numbed thought. I
     had been so confident of regaining the treaty at once that I had not
     dared to think of what would be the consequence if I failed to do so.
     But now there was nothing more to be done, and I had leisure to
     realize my position. It was horrible. Watson there would tell you
     that I was a nervous, sensitive boy at school. It is my nature. I
     thought of my uncle and of his colleagues in the Cabinet, of the
     shame which I had brought upon him, upon myself, upon every one
     connected with me. What though I was the victim of an extraordinary
     accident? No allowance is made for accidents where diplomatic
     interests are at stake. I was ruined, shamefully, hopelessly ruined.
     I don't know what I did. I fancy I must have made a scene. I have a
     dim recollection of a group of officials who crowded round me,
     endeavoring to soothe me. One of them drove down with me to Waterloo,
     and saw me into the Woking train. I believe that he would have come
     all the way had it not been that Dr. Ferrier, who lives near me, was
     going down by that very train. The doctor most kindly took charge of
     me, and it was well he did so, for I had a fit in the station, and
     before we reached home I was practically a raving maniac.


     "You can imagine the state of things here when they were roused from
     their beds by the doctor's ringing and found me in this condition.
     Poor Annie here and my mother were broken-hearted. Dr. Ferrier had
     just heard enough from the detective at the station to be able to
     give an idea of what had happened, and his story did not mend
     matters. It was evident to all that I was in for a long illness, so
     Joseph was bundled out of this cheery bedroom, and it was turned into
     a sick-room for me. Here I have lain, Mr. Holmes, for over nine
     weeks, unconscious, and raving with brain-fever. If it had not been
     for Miss Harrison here and for the doctor's care I should not be
     speaking to you now. She has nursed me by day and a hired nurse has
     looked after me by night, for in my mad fits I was capable of
     anything. Slowly my reason has cleared, but it is only during the
     last three days that my memory has quite returned. Sometimes I wish
     that it never had. The first thing that I did was to wire to Mr.
     Forbes, who had the case in hand. He came out, and assures me that,
     though everything has been done, no trace of a clue has been
     discovered. The commissionaire and his wife have been examined in
     every way without any light being thrown upon the matter. The
     suspicions of the police then rested upon young Gorot, who, as you
     may remember, stayed over time in the office that night. His
     remaining behind and his French name were really the only two points
     which could suggest suspicion; but, as a matter of fact, I did not
     begin work until he had gone, and his people are of Huguenot
     extraction, but as English in sympathy and tradition as you and I
     are. Nothing was found to implicate him in any way, and there the
     matter dropped. I turn to you, Mr. Holmes, as absolutely my last
     hope. If you fail me, then my honor as well as my position are
     forever forfeited."


     The invalid sank back upon his cushions, tired out by this long
     recital, while his nurse poured him out a glass of some stimulating
     medicine. Holmes sat silently, with his head thrown back and his eyes
     closed, in an attitude which might seem listless to a stranger, but
     which I knew betokened the most intense self-absorption.


     "You statement has been so explicit," said he at last, "that you have
     really left me very few questions to ask. There is one of the very
     utmost importance, however. Did you tell any one that you had this
     special task to perform?"


     "No one."


     "Not Miss Harrison here, for example?"


     "No. I had not been back to Woking between getting the order and
     executing the commission."


     "And none of your people had by chance been to see you?"


     "None."


     "Did any of them know their way about in the office?"


     "Oh, yes, all of them had been shown over it."


     "Still, of course, if you said nothing to any one about the treaty
     these inquiries are irrelevant."


     "I said nothing."


     "Do you know anything of the commissionaire?"


     "Nothing except that he is an old soldier."


     "What regiment?"


     "Oh, I have heard--Coldstream Guards."


     "Thank you. I have no doubt I can get details from Forbes. The
     authorities are excellent at amassing facts, though they do not
     always use them to advantage. What a lovely thing a rose is!"


     He walked past the couch to the open window, and held up the drooping
     stalk of a moss-rose, looking down at the dainty blend of crimson and
     green. It was a new phase of his character to me, for I had never
     before seen him show any keen interest in natural objects.


     "There is nothing in which deduction is so necessary as in religion,"
     said he, leaning with his back against the shutters. "It can be built
     up as an exact science by the reasoner. Our highest assurance of the
     goodness of Providence seems to me to rest in the flowers. All other
     things, our powers our desires, our food, are all really necessary
     for our existence in the first instance. But this rose is an extra.
     Its smell and its color are an embellishment of life, not a condition
     of it. It is only goodness which gives extras, and so I say again
     that we have much to hope from the flowers."


     Percy Phelps and his nurse looked at Holmes during this demonstration
     with surprise and a good deal of disappointment written upon their
     faces. He had fallen into a reverie, with the moss-rose between his
     fingers. It had lasted some minutes before the young lady broke in
     upon it.


     "Do you see any prospect of solving this mystery, Mr. Holmes?" she
     asked, with a touch of asperity in her voice.


     "Oh, the mystery!" he answered, coming back with a start to the
     realities of life. "Well, it would be absurd to deny that the case is
     a very abstruse and complicated one, but I can promise you that I
     will look into the matter and let you know any points which may
     strike me."


     "Do you see any clue?"


     "You have furnished me with seven, but, of course, I must test them
     before I can pronounce upon their value."


     "You suspect some one?"


     "I suspect myself."


     "What!"


     "Of coming to conclusions too rapidly."


     "Then go to London and test your conclusions."


     "Your advice is very excellent, Miss Harrison," said Holmes, rising.
     "I think, Watson, we cannot do better. Do not allow yourself to
     indulge in false hopes, Mr. Phelps. The affair is a very tangled
     one."


     "I shall be in a fever until I see you again," cried the diplomatist.


     "Well, I'll come out by the same train to-morrow, though it's more
     than likely that my report will be a negative one."


     "God bless you for promising to come," cried our client. "It gives me
     fresh life to know that something is being done. By the way, I have
     had a letter from Lord Holdhurst."


     "Ha! What did he say?"


     "He was cold, but not harsh. I dare say my severe illness prevented
     him from being that. He repeated that the matter was of the utmost
     importance, and added that no steps would be taken about my
     future--by which he means, of course, my dismissal--until my health
     was restored and I had an opportunity of repairing my misfortune."


     "Well, that was reasonable and considerate," said Holmes. "Come,
     Watson, for we have a good day's work before us in town."


     Mr. Joseph Harrison drove us down to the station, and we were soon
     whirling up in a Portsmouth train. Holmes was sunk in profound
     thought, and hardly opened his mouth until we had passed Clapham
     Junction.


     "It's a very cheery thing to come into London by any of these lines
     which run high, and allow you to look down upon the houses like
     this."


     I thought he was joking, for the view was sordid enough, but he soon
     explained himself.


     "Look at those big, isolated clumps of building rising up above the
     slates, like brick islands in a lead-colored sea."


     "The board-schools."


     "Light-houses, my boy! Beacons of the future! Capsules with hundreds
     of bright little seeds in each, out of which will spring the wise,
     better England of the future. I suppose that man Phelps does not
     drink?"


     "I should not think so."


     "Nor should I, but we are bound to take every possibility into
     account. The poor devil has certainly got himself into very deep
     water, and it's a question whether we shall ever be able to get him
     ashore. What did you think of Miss Harrison?"


     "A girl of strong character."


     "Yes, but she is a good sort, or I am mistaken. She and her brother
     are the only children of an iron-master somewhere up Northumberland
     way. He got engaged to her when traveling last winter, and she came
     down to be introduced to his people, with her brother as escort. Then
     came the smash, and she stayed on to nurse her lover, while brother
     Joseph, finding himself pretty snug, stayed on too. I've been making
     a few independent inquiries, you see. But to-day must be a day of
     inquiries."


     "My practice--" I began.


     "Oh, if you find your own cases more interesting than mine--" said
     Holmes, with some asperity.


     "I was going to say that my practice could get along very well for a
     day or two, since it is the slackest time in the year."


     "Excellent," said he, recovering his good-humor. "Then we'll look
     into this matter together. I think that we should begin by seeing
     Forbes. He can probably tell us all the details we want until we know
     from what side the case is to be approached."


     "You said you had a clue?"


     "Well, we have several, but we can only test their value by further
     inquiry. The most difficult crime to track is the one which is
     purposeless. Now this is not purposeless. Who is it who profits by
     it? There is the French ambassador, there is the Russian, there is
     who-ever might sell it to either of these, and there is Lord
     Holdhurst."


     "Lord Holdhurst!"


     "Well, it is just conceivable that a statesman might find himself in
     a position where he was not sorry to have such a document
     accidentally destroyed."


     "Not a statesman with the honorable record of Lord Holdhurst?"


     "It is a possibility and we cannot afford to disregard it. We shall
     see the noble lord to-day and find out if he can tell us anything.
     Meanwhile I have already set inquiries on foot."


     "Already?"


     "Yes, I sent wires from Woking station to every evening paper in
     London. This advertisement will appear in each of them."


     He handed over a sheet torn from a note-book. On it was scribbled in
     pencil:


     "Â£10 reward. The number of the cab which dropped a fare at or about
     the door of the Foreign Office in Charles Street at quarter to ten in
     the evening of May 23d. Apply 221b, Baker Street."


     "You are confident that the thief came in a cab?"


     "If not, there is no harm done. But if Mr. Phelps is correct in
     stating that there is no hiding-place either in the room or the
     corridors, then the person must have come from outside. If he came
     from outside on so wet a night, and yet left no trace of damp upon
     the linoleum, which was examined within a few minutes of his passing,
     then it is exceeding probably that he came in a cab. Yes, I think
     that we may safely deduce a cab."


     "It sounds plausible."


     "That is one of the clues of which I spoke. It may lead us to
     something. And then, of course, there is the bell--which is the most
     distinctive feature of the case. Why should the bell ring? Was it the
     thief who did it out of bravado? Or was it some one who was with the
     thief who did it in order to prevent the crime? Or was it an
     accident? Or was it--?" He sank back into the state of intense and
     silent thought from which he had emerged; but it seemed to me,
     accustomed as I was to his every mood, that some new possibility had
     dawned suddenly upon him.


     It was twenty past three when we reached our terminus, and after a
     hasty luncheon at the buffet we pushed on at once to Scotland Yard.
     Holmes had already wired to Forbes, and we found him waiting to
     receive us--a small, foxy man with a sharp but by no means amiable
     expression. He was decidedly frigid in his manner to us, especially
     when he heard the errand upon which we had come.


     "I've heard of your methods before now, Mr. Holmes," said he, tartly.
     "You are ready enough to use all the information that the police can
     lay at your disposal, and then you try to finish the case yourself
     and bring discredit on them."


     "On the contrary," said Holmes, "out of my last fifty-three cases my
     name has only appeared in four, and the police have had all the
     credit in forty-nine. I don't blame you for not knowing this, for you
     are young and inexperienced, but if you wish to get on in your new
     duties you will work with me and not against me."


     "I'd be very glad of a hint or two," said the detective, changing his
     manner. "I've certainly had no credit from the case so far."


     "What steps have you taken?"


     "Tangey, the commissionaire, has been shadowed. He left the Guards
     with a good character and we can find nothing against him. His wife
     is a bad lot, though. I fancy she knows more about this than
     appears."


     "Have you shadowed her?"


     "We have set one of our women on to her. Mrs. Tangey drinks, and our
     woman has been with her twice when she was well on, but she could get
     nothing out of her."


     "I understand that they have had brokers in the house?"


     "Yes, but they were paid off."


     "Where did the money come from?"


     "That was all right. His pension was due. They have not shown any
     sign of being in funds."


     "What explanation did she give of having answered the bell when Mr.
     Phelps rang for the coffee?"


     "She said that he husband was very tired and she wished to relieve
     him."


     "Well, certainly that would agree with his being found a little later
     asleep in his chair. There is nothing against them then but the
     woman's character. Did you ask her why she hurried away that night?
     Her haste attracted the attention of the police constable."


     "She was later than usual and wanted to get home."


     "Did you point out to her that you and Mr. Phelps, who started at
     least twenty minutes after he, got home before her?"


     "She explains that by the difference between a 'bus and a hansom."


     "Did she make it clear why, on reaching her house, she ran into the
     back kitchen?"


     "Because she had the money there with which to pay off the brokers."


     "She has at least an answer for everything. Did you ask her whether
     in leaving she met any one or saw any one loitering about Charles
     Street?"


     "She saw no one but the constable."


     "Well, you seem to have cross-examined her pretty thoroughly. What
     else have you done?"


     "The clerk Gorot has been shadowed all these nine weeks, but without
     result. We can show nothing against him."


     "Anything else?"


     "Well, we have nothing else to go upon--no evidence of any kind."


     "Have you formed a theory about how that bell rang?"


     "Well, I must confess that it beats me. It was a cool hand, whoever
     it was, to go and give the alarm like that."


     "Yes, it was a queer thing to do. Many thanks to you for what you
     have told me. If I can put the man into your hands you shall hear
     from me. Come along, Watson."


     "Where are we going to now?" I asked, as we left the office.


     "We are now going to interview Lord Holdhurst, the cabinet minister
     and future premier of England."


     We were fortunate in finding that Lord Holdhurst was still in his
     chambers in Downing Street, and on Holmes sending in his card we were
     instantly shown up. The statesman received us with that old-fashioned
     courtesy for which he is remarkable, and seated us on the two
     luxuriant lounges on either side of the fireplace. Standing on the
     rug between us, with his slight, tall figure, his sharp features,
     thoughtful face, and curling hair prematurely tinged with gray, he
     seemed to represent that not too common type, a nobleman who is in
     truth noble.


     "Your name is very familiar to me, Mr. Holmes," said he, smiling.
     "And, of course, I cannot pretend to be ignorant of the object of
     your visit. There has only been one occurrence in these offices which
     could call for your attention. In whose interest are you acting, may
     I ask?"


     "In that of Mr. Percy Phelps," answered Holmes.


     "Ah, my unfortunate nephew! You can understand that our kinship makes
     it the more impossible for me to screen him in any way. I fear that
     the incident must have a very prejudicial effect upon his career."


     "But if the document is found?"


     "Ah, that, of course, would be different."


     "I had one or two questions which I wished to ask you, Lord
     Holdhurst."


     "I shall be happy to give you any information in my power."


     "Was it in this room that you gave your instructions as to the
     copying of the document?"


     "It was."


     "Then you could hardly have been overheard?"


     "It is out of the question."


     "Did you ever mention to any one that it was your intention to give
     any one the treaty to be copied?"


     "Never."


     "You are certain of that?"


     "Absolutely."


     "Well, since you never said so, and Mr. Phelps never said so, and
     nobody else knew anything of the matter, then the thief's presence in
     the room was purely accidental. He saw his chance and he took it."


     The statesman smiled. "You take me out of my province there," said
     he.


     Holmes considered for a moment. "There is another very important
     point which I wish to discuss with you," said he. "You feared, as I
     understand, that very grave results might follow from the details of
     this treaty becoming known."


     A shadow passed over the expressive face of the statesman. "Very
     grave results indeed."


     "And have they occurred?"


     "Not yet."


     "If the treaty had reached, let us say, the French or Russian Foreign
     Office, you would expect to hear of it?"


     "I should," said Lord Holdhurst, with a wry face.


     "Since nearly ten weeks have elapsed, then, and nothing has been
     heard, it is not unfair to suppose that for some reason the treaty
     has not reached them."


     Lord Holdhurst shrugged his shoulders.


     "We can hardly suppose, Mr. Holmes, that the thief took the treaty in
     order to frame it and hang it up."


     "Perhaps he is waiting for a better price."


     "If he waits a little longer he will get no price at all. The treaty
     will cease to be secret in a few months."


     "That is most important," said Holmes. "Of course, it is a possible
     supposition that the thief has had a sudden illness--"


     "An attack of brain-fever, for example?" asked the statesman,
     flashing a swift glance at him.


     "I did not say so," said Holmes, imperturbably. "And now, Lord
     Holdhurst, we have already taken up too much of your valuable time,
     and we shall wish you good-day."


     "Every success to your investigation, be the criminal who it may,"
     answered the nobleman, as he bowed us out the door.


     "He's a fine fellow," said Holmes, as we came out into Whitehall.
     "But he has a struggle to keep up his position. He is far from rich
     and has many calls. You noticed, of course, that his boots had been
     re-soled? Now, Watson, I won't detain you from your legitimate work
     any longer. I shall do nothing more to-day, unless I have an answer
     to my cab advertisement. But I should be extremely obliged to you if
     you would come down with me to Woking to-morrow, by the same train
     which we took yesterday."


     I met him accordingly next morning and we traveled down to Woking
     together. He had had no answer to his advertisement, he said, and no
     fresh light had been thrown upon the case. He had, when he so willed
     it, the utter immobility of countenance of a red Indian, and I could
     not gather from his appearance whether he was satisfied or not with
     the position of the case. His conversation, I remember, was about the
     Bertillon system of measurements, and he expressed his enthusiastic
     admiration of the French savant.


     We found our client still under the charge of his devoted nurse, but
     looking considerably better than before. He rose from the sofa and
     greeted us without difficulty when we entered.


     "Any news?" he asked, eagerly.


     "My report, as I expected, is a negative one," said Holmes. "I have
     seen Forbes, and I have seen your uncle, and I have set one or two
     trains of inquiry upon foot which may lead to something."


     "You have not lost heart, then?"


     "By no means."


     "God bless you for saying that!" cried Miss Harrison. "If we keep our
     courage and our patience the truth must come out."


     "We have more to tell you than you have for us," said Phelps,
     reseating himself upon the couch.


     "I hoped you might have something."


     "Yes, we have had an adventure during the night, and one which might
     have proved to be a serious one." His expression grew very grave as
     he spoke, and a look of something akin to fear sprang up in his eyes.
     "Do you know," said he, "that I begin to believe that I am the
     unconscious centre of some monstrous conspiracy, and that my life is
     aimed at as well as my honor?"


     "Ah!" cried Holmes.


     "It sounds incredible, for I have not, as far as I know, an enemy in
     the world. Yet from last night's experience I can come to no other
     conclusion."


     "Pray let me hear it."


     "You must know that last night was the very first night that I have
     ever slept without a nurse in the room. I was so much better that I
     thought I could dispense with one. I had a night-light burning,
     however. Well, about two in the morning I had sunk into a light sleep
     when I was suddenly aroused by a slight noise. It was like the sound
     which a mouse makes when it is gnawing a plank, and I lay listening
     to it for some time under the impression that it must come from that
     cause. Then it grew louder, and suddenly there came from the window a
     sharp metallic snick. I sat up in amazement. There could be no doubt
     what the sounds were now. The first ones had been caused by some one
     forcing an instrument through the slit between the sashes, and the
     second by the catch being pressed back.


     "There was a pause then for about ten minutes, as if the person were
     waiting to see whether the noise had awakened me. Then I heard a
     gentle creaking as the window was very slowly opened. I could stand
     it no longer, for my nerves are not what they used to be. I sprang
     out of bed and flung open the shutters. A man was crouching at the
     window. I could see little of him, for he was gone like a flash. He
     was wrapped in some sort of cloak which came across the lower part of
     his face. One thing only I am sure of, and that is that he had some
     weapon in his hand. It looked to me like a long knife. I distinctly
     saw the gleam of it as he turned to run."


     "This is most interesting," said Holmes. "Pray what did you do then?"


     "I should have followed him through the open window if I had been
     stronger. As it was, I rang the bell and roused the house. It took me
     some little time, for the bell rings in the kitchen and the servants
     all sleep upstairs. I shouted, however, and that brought Joseph down,
     and he roused the others. Joseph and the groom found marks on the bed
     outside the window, but the weather has been so dry lately that they
     found it hopeless to follow the trail across the grass. There's a
     place, however, on the wooden fence which skirts the road which shows
     signs, they tell me, as if some one had got over, and had snapped the
     top of the rail in doing so. I have said nothing to the local police
     yet, for I thought I had best have your opinion first."


     This tale of our client's appeared to have an extraordinary effect
     upon Sherlock Holmes. He rose from his chair and paced about the room
     in uncontrollable excitement.


     "Misfortunes never come single," said Phelps, smiling, though it was
     evident that his adventure had somewhat shaken him.


     "You have certainly had your share," said Holmes. "Do you think you
     could walk round the house with me?"


     "Oh, yes, I should like a little sunshine. Joseph will come, too."


     "And I also," said Miss Harrison.


     "I am afraid not," said Holmes, shaking his head. "I think I must ask
     you to remain sitting exactly where you are."


     The young lady resumed her seat with an air of displeasure. Her
     brother, however, had joined us and we set off all four together. We
     passed round the lawn to the outside of the young diplomatist's
     window. There were, as he had said, marks upon the bed, but they were
     hopelessly blurred and vague. Holmes stopped over them for an
     instant, and then rose shrugging his shoulders.


     "I don't think any one could make much of this," said he. "Let us go
     round the house and see why this particular room was chose by the
     burglar. I should have thought those larger windows of the
     drawing-room and dining-room would have had more attractions for
     him."


     "They are more visible from the road," suggested Mr. Joseph Harrison.


     "Ah, yes, of course. There is a door here which he might have
     attempted. What is it for?"


     "It is the side entrance for trades-people. Of course it is locked at
     night."


     "Have you ever had an alarm like this before?"


     "Never," said our client.


     "Do you keep plate in the house, or anything to attract burglars?"


     "Nothing of value."


     Holmes strolled round the house with his hands in his pockets and a
     negligent air which was unusual with him.


     "By the way," said he to Joseph Harrison, "you found some place, I
     understand, where the fellow scaled the fence. Let us have a look at
     that!"


     The plump young man led us to a spot where the top of one of the
     wooden rails had been cracked. A small fragment of the wood was
     hanging down. Holmes pulled it off and examined it critically.


     "Do you think that was done last night? It looks rather old, does it
     not?"


     "Well, possibly so."


     "There are no marks of any one jumping down upon the other side. No,
     I fancy we shall get no help here. Let us go back to the bedroom and
     talk the matter over."


     Percy Phelps was walking very slowly, leaning upon the arm of his
     future brother-in-law. Holmes walked swiftly across the lawn, and we
     were at the open window of the bedroom long before the others came
     up.


     "Miss Harrison," said Holmes, speaking with the utmost intensity of
     manner, "you must stay where you are all day. Let nothing prevent you
     from staying where you are all day. It is of the utmost importance."


     "Certainly, if you wish it, Mr. Holmes," said the girl in
     astonishment.


     "When you go to bed lock the door of this room on the outside and
     keep the key. Promise to do this."


     "But Percy?"


     "He will come to London with us."


     "And am I to remain here?"


     "It is for his sake. You can serve him. Quick! Promise!"


     She gave a quick nod of assent just as the other two came up.


     "Why do you sit moping there, Annie?" cried her brother. "Come out
     into the sunshine!"


     "No, thank you, Joseph. I have a slight headache and this room is
     deliciously cool and soothing."


     "What do you propose now, Mr. Holmes?" asked our client.


     "Well, in investigating this minor affair we must not lose sight of
     our main inquiry. It would be a very great help to me if you would
     come up to London with us."


     "At once?"


     "Well, as soon as you conveniently can. Say in an hour."


     "I feel quite strong enough, if I can really be of any help."


     "The greatest possible."


     "Perhaps you would like me to stay there to-night?"


     "I was just going to propose it."


     "Then, if my friend of the night comes to revisit me, he will find
     the bird flown. We are all in your hands, Mr. Holmes, and you must
     tell us exactly what you would like done. Perhaps you would prefer
     that Joseph came with us so as to look after me?"


     "Oh, no; my friend Watson is a medical man, you know, and he'll look
     after you. We'll have our lunch here, if you will permit us, and then
     we shall all three set off for town together."


     It was arranged as he suggested, though Miss Harrison excused herself
     from leaving the bedroom, in accordance with Holmes's suggestion.
     What the object of my friend's manoeuvres was I could not conceive,
     unless it were to keep the lady away from Phelps, who, rejoiced by
     his returning health and by the prospect of action, lunched with us
     in the dining-room. Holmes had still more startling surprise for us,
     however, for, after accompanying us down to the station and seeing us
     into our carriage, he calmly announced that he had no intention of
     leaving Woking.


     "There are one or two small points which I should desire to clear up
     before I go," said he. "Your absence, Mr. Phelps, will in some ways
     rather assist me. Watson, when you reach London you would oblige me
     by driving at once to Baker Street with our friend here, and
     remaining with him until I see you again. It is fortunate that you
     are old school-fellows, as you must have much to talk over. Mr.
     Phelps can have the spare bedroom to-night, and I will be with you in
     time for breakfast, for there is a train which will take me into
     Waterloo at eight."


     "But how about our investigation in London?" asked Phelps, ruefully.


     "We can do that to-morrow. I think that just at present I can be of
     more immediate use here."


     "You might tell them at Briarbrae that I hope to be back to-morrow
     night," cried Phelps, as we began to move from the platform.


     "I hardly expect to go back to Briarbrae," answered Holmes, and waved
     his hand to us cheerily as we shot out from the station.


     Phelps and I talked it over on our journey, but neither of us could
     devise a satisfactory reason for this new development.


     "I suppose he wants to find out some clue as to the burglary last
     night, if a burglar it was. For myself, I don't believe it was an
     ordinary thief."


     "What is your own idea, then?"


     "Upon my word, you may put it down to my weak nerves or not, but I
     believe there is some deep political intrigue going on around me, and
     that for some reason that passes my understanding my life is aimed at
     by the conspirators. It sounds high-flown and absurd, but consider
     the facts! Why should a thief try to break in at a bedroom window,
     where there could be no hope of any plunder, and why should he come
     with a long knife in his hand?"


     "You are sure it was not a house-breaker's jimmy?"


     "Oh, no, it was a knife. I saw the flash of the blade quite
     distinctly."


     "But why on earth should you be pursued with such animosity?"


     "Ah, that is the question."


     "Well, if Holmes takes the same view, that would account for his
     action, would it not? Presuming that your theory is correct, if he
     can lay his hands upon the man who threatened you last night he will
     have gone a long way towards finding who took the naval treaty. It is
     absurd to suppose that you have two enemies, one of whom robs you,
     while the other threatens your life."


     "But Holmes said that he was not going to Briarbrae."


     "I have known him for some time," said I, "but I never knew him do
     anything yet without a very good reason," and with that our
     conversation drifted off on to other topics.


     But it was a weary day for me. Phelps was still weak after his long
     illness, and his misfortune made him querulous and nervous. In vain I
     endeavored to interest him in Afghanistan, in India, in social
     questions, in anything which might take his mind out of the groove.
     He would always come back to his lost treaty, wondering, guessing,
     speculating, as to what Holmes was doing, what steps Lord Holdhurst
     was taking, what news we should have in the morning. As the evening
     wore on his excitement became quite painful.


     "You have implicit faith in Holmes?" he asked.


     "I have seen him do some remarkable things."


     "But he never brought light into anything quite so dark as this?"


     "Oh, yes, I have known him solve questions which presented fewer
     clues than yours."


     "But not where such large interests are at stake?"


     "I don't know that. To my certain knowledge he has acted on behalf of
     three of the reigning houses of Europe in very vital matters."


     "But you know him well, Watson. He is such an inscrutable fellow that
     I never quite know what to make of him. Do you think he is hopeful?
     Do you think he expects to make a success of it?"


     "He has said nothing."


     "That is a bad sign."


     "On the contrary, I have noticed that when he is off the trail he
     generally says so. It is when he is on a scent and is not quite
     absolutely sure yet that it is the right one that he is most
     taciturn. Now, my dear fellow, we can't help matters by making
     ourselves nervous about them, so let me implore you to go to bed and
     so be fresh for whatever may await us to-morrow."


     I was able at last to persuade my companion to take my advice, though
     I knew from his excited manner that there was not much hope of sleep
     for him. Indeed, his mood was infectious, for I lay tossing half the
     night myself, brooding over this strange problem, and inventing a
     hundred theories, each of which was more impossible than the last.
     Why had Holmes remained at Woking? Why had he asked Miss Harrison to
     remain in the sick-room all day? Why had he been so careful not to
     inform the people at Briarbrae that he intended to remain near them?
     I cudgelled my brains until I fell asleep in the endeavor to find
     some explanation which would cover all these facts.


     It was seven o'clock when I awoke, and I set off at once for Phelps's
     room, to find him haggard and spent after a sleepless night. His
     first question was whether Holmes had arrived yet.


     "He'll be here when he promised," said I, "and not an instant sooner
     or later."


     And my words were true, for shortly after eight a hansom dashed up to
     the door and our friend got out of it. Standing in the window we saw
     that his left hand was swathed in a bandage and that his face was
     very grim and pale. He entered the house, but it was some little time
     before he came upstairs.


     "He looks like a beaten man," cried Phelps.


     I was forced to confess that he was right. "After all," said I, "the
     clue of the matter lies probably here in town."


     Phelps gave a groan.


     "I don't know how it is," said he, "but I had hoped for so much from
     his return. But surely his hand was not tied up like that yesterday.
     What can be the matter?"


     "You are not wounded, Holmes?" I asked, as my friend entered the
     room.


     "Tut, it is only a scratch through my own clumsiness," he answered,
     nodding his good-mornings to us. "This case of yours, Mr. Phelps, is
     certainly one of the darkest which I have ever investigated."


     "I feared that you would find it beyond you."


     "It has been a most remarkable experience."


     "That bandage tells of adventures," said I. "Won't you tell us what
     has happened?"


     "After breakfast, my dear Watson. Remember that I have breathed
     thirty miles of Surrey air this morning. I suppose that there has
     been no answer from my cabman advertisement? Well, well, we cannot
     expect to score every time."


     The table was all laid, and just as I was about to ring Mrs. Hudson
     entered with the tea and coffee. A few minutes later she brought in
     three covers, and we all drew up to the table, Holmes ravenous, I
     curious, and Phelps in the gloomiest state of depression.


     "Mrs. Hudson has risen to the occasion," said Holmes, uncovering a
     dish of curried chicken. "Her cuisine is a little limited, but she
     has as good an idea of breakfast as a Scotch-woman. What have you
     here, Watson?"


     "Ham and eggs," I answered.


     "Good! What are you going to take, Mr. Phelps--curried fowl or eggs,
     or will you help yourself?"


     "Thank you. I can eat nothing," said Phelps.


     "Oh, come! Try the dish before you."


     "Thank you, I would really rather not."


     "Well, then," said Holmes, with a mischievous twinkle, "I suppose
     that you have no objection to helping me?"


     Phelps raised the cover, and as he did so he uttered a scream, and
     sat there staring with a face as white as the plate upon which he
     looked. Across the centre of it was lying a little cylinder of
     blue-gray paper. He caught it up, devoured it with his eyes, and then
     danced madly about the room, passing it to his bosom and shrieking
     out in his delight. Then he fell back into an arm-chair so limp and
     exhausted with his own emotions that we had to pour brandy down his
     throat to keep him from fainting.


     "There! there!" said Holmes, soothing, patting him upon the shoulder.
     "It was too bad to spring it on you like this, but Watson here will
     tell you that I never can resist a touch of the dramatic."


     Phelps seized his hand and kissed it. "God bless you!" he cried. "You
     have saved my honor."


     "Well, my own was at stake, you know," said Holmes. "I assure you it
     is just as hateful to me to fail in a case as it can be to you to
     blunder over a commission."


     Phelps thrust away the precious document into the innermost pocket of
     his coat.


     "I have not the heart to interrupt your breakfast any further, and
     yet I am dying to know how you got it and where it was."


     Sherlock Holmes swallowed a cup of coffee, and turned his attention
     to the ham and eggs. Then he rose, lit his pipe, and settled himself
     down into his chair.


     "I'll tell you what I did first, and how I came to do it afterwards,"
     said he. "After leaving you at the station I went for a charming walk
     through some admirable Surrey scenery to a pretty little village
     called Ripley, where I had my tea at an inn, and took the precaution
     of filling my flask and of putting a paper of sandwiches in my
     pocket. There I remained until evening, when I set off for Woking
     again, and found myself in the high-road outside Briarbrae just after
     sunset.


     "Well, I waited until the road was clear--it is never a very
     frequented one at any time, I fancy--and then I clambered over the
     fence into the grounds."


     "Surely the gate was open!" ejaculated Phelps.


     "Yes, but I have a peculiar taste in these matters. I chose the place
     where the three fir-trees stand, and behind their screen I got over
     without the least chance of any one in the house being able to see
     me. I crouched down among the bushes on the other side, and crawled
     from one to the other--witness the disreputable state of my trouser
     knees--until I had reached the clump of rhododendrons just opposite
     to your bedroom window. There I squatted down and awaited
     developments.


     "The blind was not down in your room, and I could see Miss Harrison
     sitting there reading by the table. It was quarter-past ten when she
     closed her book, fastened the shutters, and retired.


     "I heard her shut the door, and felt quite sure that she had turned
     the key in the lock."


     "The key!" ejaculated Phelps.


     "Yes, I had given Miss Harrison instructions to lock the door on the
     outside and take the key with her when she went to bed. She carried
     out every one of my injunctions to the letter, and certainly without
     her cooperation you would not have that paper in you coat-pocket. She
     departed then and the lights went out, and I was left squatting in
     the rhododendron-bush.


     "The night was fine, but still it was a very weary vigil. Of course
     it has the sort of excitement about it that the sportsman feels when
     he lies beside the water-course and waits for the big game. It was
     very long, though--almost as long, Watson, as when you and I waited
     in that deadly room when we looked into the little problem of the
     Speckled Band. There was a church-clock down at Woking which struck
     the quarters, and I thought more than once that it had stopped. At
     last however about two in the morning, I suddenly heard the gentle
     sound of a bolt being pushed back and the creaking of a key. A moment
     later the servant's door was opened, and Mr. Joseph Harrison stepped
     out into the moonlight."


     "Joseph!" ejaculated Phelps.


     "He was bare-headed, but he had a black coat thrown over his shoulder
     so that he could conceal his face in an instant if there were any
     alarm. He walked on tiptoe under the shadow of the wall, and when he
     reached the window he worked a long-bladed knife through the sash and
     pushed back the catch. Then he flung open the window, and putting his
     knife through the crack in the shutters, he thrust the bar up and
     swung them open.


     "From where I lay I had a perfect view of the inside of the room and
     of every one of his movements. He lit the two candles which stood
     upon the mantelpiece, and then he proceeded to turn back the corner
     of the carpet in the neighborhood of the door. Presently he stopped
     and picked out a square piece of board, such as is usually left to
     enable plumbers to get at the joints of the gas-pipes. This one
     covered, as a matter of fact, the T joint which gives off the pipe
     which supplies the kitchen underneath. Out of this hiding-place he
     drew that little cylinder of paper, pushed down the board, rearranged
     the carpet, blew out the candles, and walked straight into my arms as
     I stood waiting for him outside the window.


     "Well, he has rather more viciousness than I gave him credit for, has
     Master Joseph. He flew at me with his knife, and I had to grasp him
     twice, and got a cut over the knuckles, before I had the upper hand
     of him. He looked murder out of the only eye he could see with when
     we had finished, but he listened to reason and gave up the papers.
     Having got them I let my man go, but I wired full particulars to
     Forbes this morning. If he is quick enough to catch his bird, well
     and good. But if, as I shrewdly suspect, he finds the nest empty
     before he gets there, why, all the better for the government. I fancy
     that Lord Holdhurst for one, and Mr. Percy Phelps for another, would
     very much rather that the affair never got as far as a police-court.


     "My God!" gasped our client. "Do you tell me that during these long
     ten weeks of agony the stolen papers were within the very room with
     me all the time?"


     "So it was."


     "And Joseph! Joseph a villain and a thief!"


     "Hum! I am afraid Joseph's character is a rather deeper and more
     dangerous one than one might judge from his appearance. From what I
     have heard from him this morning, I gather that he has lost heavily
     in dabbling with stocks, and that he is ready to do anything on earth
     to better his fortunes. Being an absolutely selfish man, when a
     chance presented itself he did not allow either his sister's
     happiness or your reputation to hold his hand."


     Percy Phelps sank back in his chair. "My head whirls," said he. "Your
     words have dazed me."


     "The principal difficulty in your case," remarked Holmes, in his
     didactic fashion, "lay in the fact of there being too much evidence.
     What was vital was overlaid and hidden by what was irrelevant. Of all
     the facts which were presented to us we had to pick just those which
     we deemed to be essential, and then piece them together in their
     order, so as to reconstruct this very remarkable chain of events. I
     had already begun to suspect Joseph, from the fact that you had
     intended to travel home with him that night, and that therefore it
     was a likely enough thing that he should call for you, knowing the
     Foreign Office well, upon his way. When I heard that some one had
     been so anxious to get into the bedroom, in which no one but Joseph
     could have concealed anything--you told us in your narrative how you
     had turned Joseph out when you arrived with the doctor--my suspicions
     all changed to certainties, especially as the attempt was made on the
     first night upon which the nurse was absent, showing that the
     intruder was well acquainted with the ways of the house."


     "How blind I have been!"


     "The facts of the case, as far as I have worked them out, are these:
     this Joseph Harrison entered the office through the Charles Street
     door, and knowing his way he walked straight into your room the
     instant after you left it. Finding no one there he promptly rang the
     bell, and at the instant that he did so his eyes caught the paper
     upon the table. A glance showed him that chance had put in his way a
     State document of immense value, and in an instant he had thrust it
     into his pocket and was gone. A few minutes elapsed, as you remember,
     before the sleepy commissionaire drew your attention to the bell, and
     those were just enough to give the thief time to make his escape.


     "He made his way to Woking by the first train, and having examined
     his booty and assured himself that it really was of immense value, he
     had concealed it in what he thought was a very safe place, with the
     intention of taking it out again in a day or two, and carrying it to
     the French embassy, or wherever he thought that a long price was to
     be had. Then came your sudden return. He, without a moment's warning,
     was bundled out of his room, and from that time onward there were
     always at least two of you there to prevent him from regaining his
     treasure. The situation to him must have been a maddening one. But at
     last he thought he saw his chance. He tried to steal in, but was
     baffled by your wakefulness. You remember that you did not take your
     usual draught that night."


     "I remember."


     "I fancy that he had taken steps to make that draught efficacious,
     and that he quite relied upon your being unconscious. Of course, I
     understood that he would repeat the attempt whenever it could be done
     with safety. Your leaving the room gave him the chance he wanted. I
     kept Miss Harrison in it all day so that he might not anticipate us.
     Then, having given him the idea that the coast was clear, I kept
     guard as I have described. I already knew that the papers were
     probably in the room, but I had no desire to rip up all the planking
     and skirting in search of them. I let him take them, therefore, from
     the hiding-place, and so saved myself an infinity of trouble. Is
     there any other point which I can make clear?"


     "Why did he try the window on the first occasion," I asked, "when he
     might have entered by the door?"


     "In reaching the door he would have to pass seven bedrooms. On the
     other hand, he could get out on to the lawn with ease. Anything
     else?"


     "You do not think," asked Phelps, "that he had any murderous
     intention? The knife was only meant as a tool."


     "It may be so," answered Holmes, shrugging his shoulders. "I can only
     say for certain that Mr. Joseph Harrison is a gentleman to whose
     mercy I should be extremely unwilling to trust."
























                         THE ADVENTURE OF WISTERIA LODGE


                               Arthur Conan Doyle














                                Table of contents
        The Singular Experience of Mr. John Scott Eccles
        The Tiger of San Pedro






























          CHAPTER I
          The Singular Experience of Mr. John Scott Eccles




     I find it recorded in my notebook that it was a bleak and windy day
     towards the end of March in the year 1892.  Holmes had received a
     telegram while we sat at our lunch, and he had scribbled a reply.  He
     made no remark, but the matter remained in his thoughts, for he stood
     in front of the fire afterwards with a thoughtful face, smoking his
     pipe, and casting an occasional glance at the message. Suddenly he
     turned upon me with a mischievous twinkle in his eyes.


     "I suppose, Watson, we must look upon you as a man of letters," said
     he. "How do you define the word 'grotesque'?"


     "Strange--remarkable," I suggested.


     He shook his head at my definition.


     "There is surely something more than that," said he; "some underlying
     suggestion of the tragic and the terrible.  If you cast your mind
     back to some of those narratives with which you have afflicted a
     long-suffering public, you will recognize how often the grotesque has
     deepened into the criminal.  Think of that little affair of the
     red-headed men.  That was grotesque enough in the outset, and yet it
     ended in a desperate attempt at robbery.  Or, again, there was that
     most grotesque affair of the five orange pips, which let straight to
     a murderous conspiracy. The word puts me on the alert."


     "Have you it there?" I asked.


     He read the telegram aloud.


     "Have just had most incredible and grotesque experience. May I
     consult you?
     "Scott Eccles,
     "Post Office, Charing Cross."


     "Man or woman?" I asked.


     "Oh, man, of course. No woman would ever send a reply-paid telegram.
     She would have come."


     "Will you see him?"


     "My dear Watson, you know how bored I have been since we locked up
     Colonel Carruthers. My mind is like a racing engine, tearing itself
     to pieces because it is not connected up with the work for which it
     was built. Life is commonplace, the papers are sterile; audacity and
     romance seem to have passed forever from the criminal world. Can you
     ask me, then, whether I am ready to look into any new problem,
     however trivial it may prove? But here, unless I am mistaken, is our
     client."


     A measured step was heard upon the stairs, and a moment later a
     stout, tall, gray-whiskered and solemnly respectable person was
     ushered into the room.  His life history was written in his heavy
     features and pompous manner.  From his spats to his gold-rimmed
     spectacles he was a Conservative, a churchman, a good citizen,
     orthodox and conventional to the last degree. But some amazing
     experience had disturbed his native composure and left its traces in
     his bristling hair, his flushed, angry cheeks, and his flurried,
     excited manner. He plunged instantly into his business.


     "I have had a most singular and unpleasant experience, Mr. Holmes,"
     said he. "Never in my life have I been placed in such a situation. It
     is most improper--most outrageous. I must insist upon some
     explanation." He swelled and puffed in his anger.


     "Pray sit down, Mr. Scott Eccles," said Holmes in a soothing voice.
     "May I ask, in the first place, why you came to me at all?"


     "Well, sir, it did not appear to be a matter which concerned the
     police, and yet, when you have heard the facts, you must admit that I
     could not leave it where it was. Private detectives are a class with
     whom I have absolutely no sympathy, but none the less, having heard
     your name--"


     "Quite so.  But, in the second place, why did you not come at once?"


     "What do you mean?"


     Holmes glanced at his watch.


     "It is a quarter-past two," he said. "Your telegram was dispatched
     about one. But no one can glance at your toilet and attire without
     seeing that your disturbance dates from the moment of your waking."


     Our client smoothed down his unbrushed hair and felt his unshaven
     chin.


     "You are right, Mr. Holmes. I never gave a thought to my toilet. I
     was only too glad to get out of such a house. But I have been running
     round making inquiries before I came to you. I went to the house
     agents, you know, and they said that Mr. Garcia's rent was paid up
     all right and that everything was in order at Wisteria Lodge."


     "Come, come, sir," said Holmes, laughing. "You are like my friend,
     Dr. Watson, who has a bad habit of telling his stories wrong end
     foremost. Please arrange your thoughts and let me know, in their due
     sequence, exactly what those events are which have sent you out
     unbrushed and unkempt, with dress boots and waistcoat buttoned awry,
     in search of advice and assistance."


     Our client looked down with a rueful face at his own unconventional
     appearance.


     "I'm sure it must look very bad, Mr. Holmes, and I am not aware that
     in my whole life such a thing has ever happened before. But will tell
     you the whole queer business, and when I have done so you will admit,
     I am sure, that there has been enough to excuse me."


     But his narrative was nipped in the bud. There was a bustle outside,
     and Mrs. Hudson opened the door to usher in two robust and
     official-looking individuals, one of whom was well known to us as
     Inspector Gregson of Scotland Yard, an energetic, gallant, and,
     within his limitations, a capable officer. He shook hands with Holmes
     and introduced his comrade as Inspector Baynes, of the Surrey
     Constabulary.


     "We are hunting together, Mr. Holmes, and our trail lay in this
     direction." He turned his bulldog eyes upon our visitor. "Are you Mr.
     John Scott Eccles, of Popham House, Lee?"


     "I am."


     "We have been following you about all the morning."


     "You traced him through the telegram, no doubt," said Holmes. 


     "Exactly, Mr. Holmes. We picked up the scent at Charing Cross
     Post-Office and came on here."


     "But why do you follow me? What do you want?"


     "We wish a statement, Mr. Scott Eccles, as to the events which let up
     to the death last night of Mr. Aloysius Garcia, of Wisteria Lodge,
     near Esher."


     Our client had sat up with staring eyes and every tinge of colour
     struck from his astonished face.


     "Dead?  Did you say he was dead?"


     "Yes, sir, he is dead."


     "But how?  An accident?"


     "Murder, if ever there was one upon earth."


     "Good God! This is awful! You don't mean--you don't mean that I am
     suspected?"


     "A letter of yours was found in the dead man's pocket, and we know by
     it that you had planned to pass last night at his house."


     "So I did."


     "Oh, you did, did you?"


     Out came the official notebook.


     "Wait a bit, Gregson," said Sherlock Holmes. "All you desire is a
     plain statement, is it not?"


     "And it is my duty to warn Mr. Scott Eccles that it may be used
     against him."


     "Mr. Eccles was going to tell us about it when you entered the room.
     I think, Watson, a brandy and soda would do him no harm. Now, sir, I
     suggest that you take no notice of this addition to your audience,
     and that you proceed with your narrative exactly as you would have
     done had you never been interrupted."


     Our visitor had gulped off the brandy and the colour had returned to
     his face.  With a dubious glance at the inspector's notebook, he
     plunged at once into his extraordinary statement.


     "I am a bachelor," said he, "and being of a sociable turn I cultivate
     a large number of friends. Among these are the family of a retired
     brewer called Melville, living at Abermarle Mansion, Kensington. It
     was at his table that I met some weeks ago a young fellow named
     Garcia. He was, I understood, of Spanish descent and connected in
     some way with the embassy. He spoke perfect English, was pleasing in
     his manners, and as good-looking a man as ever I saw in my life.


     "In some way we struck up quite a friendship, this young fellow and
     I. He seemed to take a fancy to me from the first, and within two
     days of our meeting he came to see me at Lee. One thing led to
     another, and it ended in his inviting me out to spend a few days at
     his house, Wisteria Lodge, between Esher and Oxshott. Yesterday
     evening I went to Esher to fulfil this engagement.


     "He had described his household to me before I went there. He lived
     with a faithful servant, a countryman of his own, who looked after
     all his needs. This fellow could speak English and did his
     housekeeping for him. Then there was a wonderful cook, he said, a
     half-breed whom he had picked up in his travels, who could serve an
     excellent dinner. I remember that he remarked what a queer household
     it was to find in the heart of Surrey, and that I agreed with him,
     though it has proved a good deal queerer than I thought.


     "I drove to the place--about two miles on the south side of Esher.
     The house was a fair-sized one, standing back from the road, with a
     curving drive which was banked with high evergreen shrubs. It was an
     old, tumbledown building in a crazy state of disrepair. When the trap
     pulled up on the grass-grown drive in front of the blotched and
     weather-stained door, I had doubts as to my wisdom in visiting a man
     whom I knew so slightly. He opened the door himself, however, and
     greeted me with a great show of cordiality. I was handed over to the
     manservant, a melancholy, swarthy individual, who led the way, my bag
     in his hand, to my bedroom. The whole place was depressing. Our
     dinner was tÃªte-Ã -tÃªte, and though my host did his best to be
     entertaining, his thoughts seemed to continually wander, and he
     talked so vaguely and wildly that I could hardly understand him. He
     continually drummed his fingers on the table, gnawed his nails, and
     gave other signs of nervous impatience. The dinner itself was neither
     well served nor well cooked, and the gloomy presence of the taciturn
     servant did not help to enliven us. I can assure you that many times
     in the course of the evening I wished that I could invent some excuse
     which would take me back to Lee.


     "One thing comes back to my memory which may have a bearing upon the
     business that you two gentlemen are investigating. I thought nothing
     of it at the time. Near the end of dinner a note was handed in by the
     servant. I noticed that after my host had read it he seemed even more
     distrait and strange than before. He gave up all pretence at
     conversation and sat, smoking endless cigarettes, lost in his own
     thoughts, but he made no remark as to the contents. About eleven I
     was glad to go to bed. Some time later Garcia looked in at my
     door--the room was dark at the time--and asked me if I had rung. I
     said that I had not. He apologized for having disturbed me so late,
     saying that it was nearly one o'clock. I dropped off after this and
     slept soundly all night.


     "And now I come to the amazing part of my tale. When I woke it was
     broad daylight. I glanced at my watch, and the time was nearly nine.
     I had particularly asked to be called at eight, so I was very much
     astonished at this forgetfulness. I sprang up and rang for the
     servant. There was no response. I rang again and again, with the same
     result. Then I came to the conclusion that the bell was out of order.
     I huddled on my clothes and hurried downstairs in an exceedingly bad
     temper to order some hot water. You can imagine my surprise when I
     found that there was no one there. I shouted in the hall. There was
     no answer. Then I ran from room to room. All were deserted. My host
     had shown me which was his bedroom the night before, so I knocked at
     the door. No reply. I turned the handle and walked in. The room was
     empty, and the bed had never been slept in. He had gone with the
     rest. The foreign host, the foreign footman, the foreign cook, all
     had vanished in the night! That was the end of my visit to Wisteria
     Lodge."


     Sherlock Holmes was rubbing his hands and chuckling as he added this
     bizarre incident to his collection of strange episodes.


     "Your experience is, so far as I know, perfectly unique," said he.
     "May I ask, sir, what you did then?"


     "I was furious. My first idea was that I had been the victim of some
     absurd practical joke. I packed my things, banged the hall door
     behind me, and set off for Esher, with my bag in my hand. I called at
     Allan Brothers', the chief land agents in the village, and found that
     it was from this firm that the villa had been rented. It struck me
     that the whole proceeding could hardly be for the purpose of making a
     fool of me, and that the main objet must be to get out of the rent.
     It is late in March, so quarter-day is at hand. But this theory would
     not work. The agent was obliged to me for my warning, but told me
     that the rent had been paid in advance. Then I made my way to town
     and called at the Spanish embassy. The man was unknown there. After
     this I went to see Melville, at whose house I had first met Garcia,
     but I found that he really knew rather less about him than I did.
     Finally when I got your reply to my wire I came out to you, since I
     gather that you are a person who gives advice in difficult cases. But
     now, Mr. Inspector, I understand, from what you said when you entered
     the room, that you can carry the story on, and that some tragedy had
     occurred. I can assure you that every word I have said is the truth,
     and that, outside of what I have told you, I know absolutely nothing
     about the fate of this man. My only desire is to help the law in
     every possible way."


     "I am sure of it, Mr. Scott Eccles--I am sure of it," said Inspector
     Gregson in a very amiable tone. "I am bound to say that everything
     which you have said agrees very closely with the facts as they have
     come to our notice. For example, there was that note which arrived
     during dinner. Did you chance to observe what became of it?"


     "Yes, I did. Garcia rolled it up and threw it into the fire."


     "What do you say to that, Mr. Baynes?"


     The country detective was a stout, puffy, red man, whose face was
     only redeemed from grossness by two extraordinarily bright eyes,
     almost hidden behind the heavy creases of cheek and brow. With a slow
     smile he drew a folded and discoloured scrap of paper from his
     pocket.


     "It was a dog-grate, Mr. Holmes, and he overpitched it. I picked this
     out unburned from the back of it."


     Holmes smiled his appreciation.


     "You must have examined the house very carefully to find a single
     pellet of paper."


     "I did, Mr. Holmes. It's my way. Shall I read it, Mr. Gregson?"


     The Londoner nodded.


     "The note is written upon ordinary cream-laid paper without
     watermark. It is a quarter-sheet. The paper is cut off in two snips
     with a short-bladed scissors. It has been folded over three times and
     sealed with purple wax, put on hurriedly and pressed down with some
     flat oval object. It is addressed to Mr. Garcia, Wisteria Lodge. It
     says:


     "Our own colours, green and white. Green open, white shut. Main
     stair, first corridor, seventh right, green baize. Godspeed.
     D.


     "It is a woman's writing, done with a sharp-pointed pen, but the
     address is either done with another pen or by someone else. It is
     thicker and bolder, as you see."


     "A very remarkable note," said Holmes, glancing it over. "I must
     compliment you, Mr. Baynes, upon your attention to detail in your
     examination of it. A few trifling points might perhaps be added. The
     oval seal is undoubtedly a plain sleeve-link--what else is of such a
     shape? The scissors were bent nail scissors. Short as the two snips
     are, you can distinctly see the same slight curve in each."


     The country detective chuckled.


     "I thought I had squeezed all the juice out of it, but I see there
     was a little over," he said. "I'm bound to say that I make nothing of
     the note except that there was something on hand, and that a woman,
     as usual, was at the bottom of it."


     Mr. Scott Eccles had fidgeted in his seat during this conversation.


     "I am glad you found the note, since it corroborates my story," said
     he. "But I beg to point out that I have not yet heard what has
     happened to Mr. Garcia, nor what has become of his household."


     "As to Garcia," said Gregson, "that is easily answered. He was found
     dead this morning upon Oxshott Common, nearly a mile from his home.
     His head had been smashed to pulp by heavy blows of a sandbag or some
     such instrument, which had crushed rather than wounded. It is a
     lonely corner, and there is no house within a quarter of a mile of
     the spot. He had apparently been struck down first from behind, but
     his assailant had gone on beating him long after he was dead. It was
     a most furious assault. There are no footsteps nor any clue to the
     criminals."


     "Robbed?"


     "No, there was no attempt at robbery."


     "This is very painful--very painful and terrible," said Mr. Scott
     Eccles in a querulous voice, "but it is really uncommonly hard on me.
     I had nothing to do with my host going off upon a nocturnal excursion
     and meeting so sad an end. How do I come to be mixed up with the
     case?"


     "Very simply, sir," Inspector Baynes answered. "The only document
     found in the pocket of the deceased was a letter from you saying that
     you would be with him on the night of his death. It was the envelope
     of this letter which gave us the dead man's name and address. It was
     after nine this morning when we reached his house and found neither
     you nor anyone else inside it. I wired to Mr. Gregson to run you down
     in London while I examined Wisteria Lodge. Then I came into town,
     joined Mr. Gregson, and here we are."


     "I think now," said Gregson, rising, "we had best put this matter
     into an official shape. You will come round with us to the station,
     Mr. Scott Eccles, and let us have your statement in writing."


     "Certainly, I will come at once. But I retain your services, Mr.
     Holmes. I desire you to spare no expense and no pains to get at the
     truth."


     My friend turned to the country inspector.


     "I suppose that you have no objection to my collaborating with you,
     Mr. Baynes?"


     "Highly honoured, sir, I am sure."


     "You appear to have been very prompt and businesslike in all that you
     have done. Was there any clue, may I ask, as to the exact hour that
     the man met his death?"


     "He had been there since one o'clock. There was rain about that time,
     and his death had certainly been before the rain."


     "But that is perfectly impossible, Mr. Baynes," cried our client.
     "His voice is unmistakable. I could swear to it that it was he who
     addressed me in my bedroom at that very hour."


     "Remarkable, but by no means impossible," said Holmes, smiling.


     "You have a clue?" asked Gregson.


     "On the face of it the case is not a very complex one, though it
     certainly presents some novel and interesting features. A further
     knowledge of facts is necessary before I would venture to give a
     final and definite opinion. By the way, Mr. Baynes, did you find
     anything remarkable besides this note in your examination of the
     house?"


     The detective looked at my friend in a singular way.


     "There were," said he, "one or two very remarkable things. Perhaps
     when I have finished at the police-station you would care to come out
     and give me your opinion of them."


     "In am entirely at your service," said Sherlock Holmes, ringing the
     bell. "You will show these gentlemen out, Mrs. Hudson, and kindly
     send the boy with this telegram. He is to pay a five-shilling reply."


     We sat for some time in silence after our visitors had left. Holmes
     smoked hard, with his browns drawn down over his keen eyes, and his
     head thrust forward in the eager way characteristic of the man.


     "Well, Watson," he asked, turning suddenly upon me, "what do you make
     of it?"


     "I can make nothing of this mystification of Scott Eccles."


     "But the crime?"


     "Well, taken with the disappearance of the man's companions, I should
     say that they were in some way concerned in the murder and had fled
     from justice."


     "That is certainly a possible point of view. On the face of it you
     must admit, however, that it is very strange that his two servants
     should have been in a conspiracy against him and should have attacked
     him on the one night when he had a guest. They had him alone at their
     mercy every other night in the week."


     "Then why did they fly?"


     "Quite so. Why did they fly? There is a big fact. Another big fact is
     the remarkable experience of our client, Scott Eccles. Now, my dear
     Watson, is it beyond the limits of human ingenuity to furnish an
     explanation which would cover both of these big facts? If it were one
     which would also admit of the mysterious note with its very curious
     phraseology, why, then it would be worth accepting as a temporary
     hypothesis. If the fresh facts which come to our knowledge all fit
     themselves into the scheme, then our hypothesis may gradually become
     a solution."


     "But what is our hypothesis?"


     Holmes leaned back in his chair with half-closed eyes.


     "You must admit, my dear Watson, that the idea of a joke is
     impossible. There were grave events afoot, as the sequel showed, and
     the coaxing of Scott Eccles to Wisteria Lodge had some connection
     with them."


     "But what possible connection?"


     "Let us take it link by link. There is, on the face of it, something
     unnatural about this strange and sudden friendship between the young
     Spaniard and Scott Eccles. It was the former who forced the pace. He
     called upon Eccles at the other end of London on the very day after
     he first met him, and he kept in close touch with him until he got
     him down to Esher. Now, what did he want with Eccles? What could
     Eccles supply? I see no charm in the man. He is not particulary
     intelligent--not a man likely to be congenial to a quick-witted
     Latin. Why, then, was he picked out from all the other people whom
     Garcia met as particularly suited to his purpose? Has he any one
     outstanding quality? I say that he has. He is the very type of
     conventional British respectability, and the very man as a witness to
     impress another Briton. You saw yourself how neither of the
     inspectors dreamed of questioning his statement, extraordinary as it
     was."


     "But what was he to witness?"


     "Nothing, as things turned out, but everything had they gone another
     way. That is how I read the matter."


     "I see, he might have proved an alibi."


     "Exactly, my dear Watson; he might have proved an alibi. We will
     suppose, for argument's sake, that the household of Wisteria Lodge
     are confederates in some design. The attempt, whatever it may be, is
     to come off, we will say, before one o'clock. By some juggling of the
     clocks it is quite possible that they may have got Scott Eccles to
     bed earlier than he thought, but in any case it is likely that when
     Garcia went out of his way to tell him that it was one it was really
     not more than twelve. If Garcia could do whatever he had to do and be
     back by the hour mentioned he had evidently a powerful reply to any
     accusation. Here was this irreproachable Englishman ready to swear in
     any court of law that the accused was in the house all the time. It
     was an insurance against the worst."


     "Yes, yes, I see that. But how about the disappearance of the
     others?"


     "I have not all my facts yet, but I do not think there are any
     insuperable difficulties. Still, it is an error to argue in front of
     your data. You find yourself insensibly twisting them round to fit
     your theories."


     "And the message?"


     "How did it run? 'Our own colours, green and white.' Sounds like
     racing. 'Green open, white shut.' That is clearly a signal. 'Main
     stair, first corridor, seventh right, green baize.' This is an
     assignation. We may find a jealous husband at the bottom of it all.
     It was clearly a dangerous quest. She would not have said 'Godspeed'
     had it not been so. 'D'--that should be a guide."


     "The man was a Spaniard. I suggest that 'D' stands for Dolores, a
     common female name in Spain."


     "Good, Watson, very good--but quite inadmissable. A Spaniard would
     write to a Spaniard in Spanish. The writer of this note is certainly
     English. Well, we can only possess our soul in patience until this
     excellent inspector come back for us. Meanwhile we can thank our
     lucky fate which has rescued us for a few short hours from the
     insufferable fatigues of idleness."


     An answer had arrived to Holmes's telegram before our Surrey officer
     had returned. Holmes read it and was about to place it in his
     notebook when he caught a glimpse of my expectant face. He tossed it
     across with a laugh.


     "We are moving in exalted circles," said he.


     The telegram was a list of names and addresses:


     Lord Harringby, The Dingle; Sir George Ffolliott, Oxshott Towers; Mr.
     Hynes Hynes, J.P., Purdley Place; Mr. James Baker Williams, Forton
     Old Hall; Mr. Henderson, High Gable; Rev. Joshua Stone, Nether
     Walsling.
     "This is a very obvious way of limiting our field of operations,"
     said Holmes. "No doubt Baynes, with his methodical mind, has already
     adopted some similar plan."


     "I don't quite understand."


     "Well, my dear fellow, we have already arrived at the conclusion that
     the massage received by Garcia at dinner was an appointment or an
     assignation. Now, if the obvious reading of it is correct, and in
     order to keep the tryst one has to ascend a main stair and seek the
     seventh door in a corridor, it is perfectly clear that the house is a
     very large one. It is equally certain that this house cannot be more
     than a mile or two from Oxshott, since Garcia was walking in that
     direction and hoped, according to my reading of the facts, to be back
     in Wisteria Lodge in time to avail himself of an alibi, which would
     only be valid up to one o'clock. As the number of large houses close
     to Oxshott must be limited, I adopted the obvious method of sending
     to the agents mentioned by Scott Eccles and obtaining a list of them.
     Here they are in this telegram, and the other end of our tangled
     skein must lie among them."


     It was nearly six o'clock before we found ourselves in the pretty
     Surrey village of Esher, with Inspector Baynes as our companion.


     Holmes and I had taken things for the night, and found comfortable
     quarters at the Bull. Finally we set out in the company of the
     detective on our visit to Wisteria Lodge. It was a cold, dark March
     evening, with a sharp wind and a fine rain beating upon our faces, a
     fit setting for the wild common over which our road passed and the
     tragic goal to which it led us.










          CHAPTER II
          The Tiger of San Pedro




     A cold and melancholy walk of a couple of miles brought us to a high
     wooden gate, which opened into a gloomy avenue of chestnuts. The
     curved and shadowed drive led us to a low, dark house, pitch-black
     against a slate-coloured sky. From the front window upon the left of
     the door there peeped a glimmer of a feeble light.


     "There's a constable in possession," said Baynes. "I'll knock at the
     window." He stepped across the grass plot and tapped with his hand on
     the pane. Through the fogged glass I dimly saw a man spring up from a
     chair beside the fire, and heard a sharp cry from within the room. An
     instant later a white-faced, hard-breathing policeman had opened the
     door, the candle wavering in his trembling hand.


     "What's the matter, Walters?" asked Baynes sharply.


     The man mopped his forehead with his handkerchief and agave a long
     sigh of relief.


     "I am glad you have come, sir. It has been a long evening, and I
     don't think my nerve is as good as it was."


     "Your nerve, Walters? I should not have thought you had a nerve in
     your body."


     "Well, sir, it's this lonely, silent house and the queer thing in the
     kitchen. Then when you tapped at the window I thought it had come
     again."


     "That what had come again?"


     "The devil, sir, for all I know. It was at the window."


     "What was at the window, and when?"


     "It was just about two hours ago. The light was just fading. I was
     sitting reading in the chair. I don't know what made me look up, but
     there was a face looking in at me through the lower pane. Lord, sir,
     what a face it was! I'll see it in my dreams."


     "Tut, tut, Walters. This is not talk for a police-constable."


     "I know, sir, I know; but it shook me, sir, and there's no use to
     deny it. It wasn't black, sir, nor was it white, nor any colour that
     I know but a kind of queer shade like clay with a splash of milk in
     it. Then there was the size of it--it was twice yours, sir. And the
     look of it--the great staring goggle eyes, and the line of white
     teeth like a hungry beast. I tell you, sir, I couldn't move a finger,
     nor get my breath, till it whisked away and was gone. Out I ran and
     through the shrubbery, but thank God there was no one there."


     "If I didn't know you were a good man, Walters, I should put a black
     mark against you for this. If it were the devil himself a constable
     on duty should never thank God that he could not lay his hands upon
     him. I suppose the whole thing is not a vision and a touch of
     nerves?"


     "That, at least, is very easily settled," said Holmes, lighting his
     little pocket lantern. "Yes," he reported, after a short examination
     of the grass bed, "a number twelve shoe, I should say. If he was all
     on the same scale as his foot he must certainly have been a giant."


     "What became of him?"


     "He seems to have broken through the shrubbery and made for the
     road."


     "Well," said the inspector with a grave and thoughtful face, "whoever
     he may have been, and whatever he may have wanted, he's gone for the
     present, and we have more immediate things to attend to. Now, Mr.
     Holmes, with your permission, I will show you round the house."


     The various bedrooms and sitting-rooms had yielded nothing to a
     careful search. Apparently the tenants had brought little or nothing
     with them, and all the furniture down to the smallest details had
     been taken over with the house. A good deal of clothing with the
     stamp of Marx and Co., High Holborn, had been left behind.
     Telegraphic inquiries had been already made which showed that Marx
     knew nothing of his customer save that he was a good payer. Odds and
     ends, some pipes, a few novels, two of them in Spanish, and
     old-fashioned pinfire revolver, and a guitar were among the personal
     property.


     "Nothing in all this," said Baynes, stalking, candle in hand, from
     room to room. "But now, Mr. Holmes, I invite your attention to the
     kitchen."


     It was a gloomy, high-ceilinged room at the back of the house, with a
     straw litter in one corner, which served apparently as a bed for the
     cook. The table was piled with half-eaten dishes and dirty plates,
     the debris of last night's dinner.


     "Look at this," said Baynes. "What do you make of it?"


     He held up his candle before an extraordinary object which stood at
     the back of the dresser. It was so wrinkled and shrunken and withered
     that it was difficult to say what it might have been. One could but
     say that it was black and leathery and that it bore some resemblance
     to a dwarfish, human figure. At first, as I examined it, I thought
     that it was a mummified negro baby, and then it seemed a very twisted
     and ancient monkey. Finally I was left in doubt as to whether it was
     animal or human. A double band of white shells were strung round the
     centre of it.


     "Very interesting--very interesting, indeed!" said Holmes, peering at
     this sinister relic. "Anything more?"


     In silence Baynes led the way to the sink and held forward his
     candle. The limbs and body of some large, white bird, torn savagely
     to pieces with the feathers still on, were littered all over it.
     Holmes pointed to the wattles on the severed head.


     "A white cock," said he. "Most interesting! It is really a very
     curious case."


     But Mr. Baynes had kept his most sinister exhibit to the last. From
     under the sink he drew a zinc pail which contained a quantity of
     blood. Then from the table he took a platter heaped with small pieces
     of charred bone.


     "Something has been killed and something has been burned. We raked
     all these out of the fire. We had a doctor in this morning. He says
     that they are not human."


     Holmes smiled and rubbed his hands.


     "I must congratulate you, Inspector, on handling so distinctive and
     instructive a case. Your powers, if I may say so without offence,
     seem superior to your opportunities."


     Inspector Baynes's small eyes twinkled with pleasure.


     "You're right, Mr. Holmes. We stagnate in the provinces. A case of
     this sort gives a man a chance, and I hope that I shall take it. What
     do you make of these bones?"


     "A lamb, I should say, or a kid."


     "And the white cock?"


     "Curious, Mr. Baynes, very curious. I should say almost unique."


     "Yes, sir, there must have been some very strange people with some
     very strange ways in this house. One of them is dead. Did his
     companions follow him and kill him? If they did we should have them,
     for every port is watched. But my own views are different. Yes, sir,
     my own views are very different."


     "You have a theory then?"


     "And I'll work it myself, Mr. Holmes. It's only due to my own credit
     to do so. Your name is made, but I have still to make mine. I should
     be glad to be able to say afterwards that I had solved it without
     your help."


     Holmes laughed good-humoredly.


     "Well, well, Inspector," said he. "Do you follow your path and I will
     follow mine. My results are always very much at your service if you
     care to apply to me for them. I think that I have seen all that I
     wish in this house, and that my time may be more profitably employed
     elsewhere. Au revoir and good luck!"


     I could tell by numerous subtle signs, which might have been lost
     upon anyone but myself, that Holmes was on a hot scent. As impassive
     as ever to the casual observer, there were none the less a subdued
     eagerness and suggestion of tension in his brightened eyes and
     brisker manner which assured me that the game was afoot. After his
     habit he said nothing, and after mine I asked no questions.
     Sufficient for me to share the sport and lend my humble help to the
     capture without distracting that intent brain with needless
     interruption. All would come round to me in due time.


     I waited, therefore--but to my ever-deepening disappointment I waited
     in vain. Day succeeded day, and my friend took no step forward. One
     morning he spent in town, and I learned from a casual reference that
     he had visited the British Museum. Save for this one excursion, he
     spent his days in long and often solitary walks, or in chatting with
     a number of village gossips whose acquaintance he had cultivated.


     "I'm sure, Watson, a week in the country will be invaluable to you,"
     he remarked. "It is very pleasant to see the first green shoots upon
     the hedges and the catkins on the hazels once again. With a spud, a
     tin box, and an elementary book on botany, there are instructive days
     to be spent." He prowled about with this equipment himself, but it
     was a poor show of plants which he would bring back of an evening.


     Occasionally in our rambles we came across Inspector Baynes. His fat,
     red face wreathed itself in smiles and his small eyes glittered as he
     greeted my companion. He said little about the case, but from that
     little we gathered that he also was not dissatisfied at the course of
     events. I must admit, however, that I was somewhat surprised when,
     some five days after the crime, I opened my morning paper to find in
     large letters:


                               The Oxshott Mystery
                                   a solution
                           Arrest of Supposed Assassin


     Holmes sprang in his chair as if he had been stung when I read the
     headlines.


     "By Jove!" he cried. "You don't mean that Baynes has got him?"


     "Apparently," said I as I read the following report:


     "Great excitement was caused in Esher and the neighbouring district
     when it was learned late last night that an arrest had been effected
     in connection with the Oxshott murder. It will be remembered that Mr.
     Garcia, of Wisteria Lodge, was found dead on Oxshott Common, his body
     showing signs of extreme violence, and that on the same night his
     servant and his cook fled, which appeared to show their participation
     in the crime. It was suggested, but never proved, that the deceased
     gentleman may have had valuables in the house, and that their
     abstraction was the motive of the crime. Every effort was made by
     Inspector Baynes, who has the case in hand, to ascertain the hiding
     place of the fugitives, and he had good reason to believe that they
     had not gone far but were lurking in some retreat which had been
     already prepared. It was certain from the first, however, that they
     would eventually be detected, as the cook, from the evidence of one
     or two tradespeople who have caught a glimpse of him through the
     window, was a man of most remarkable appearance--being a huge and
     hideous mulatto, with yellowish features of a pronounced negroid
     type. This man has been seen since the crime, for he was detected and
     pursued by Constable Walters on the same evening, when he had the
     audacity to revisit Wisteria Lodge. Inspector Baynes, considering
     that such a visit must have some purpose in view and was likely,
     therefore, to be repeated, abandoned the house but left an ambuscade
     in the shrubbery. The man walked into the trap and was captured last
     night after a struggle in which Constable Downing was badly bitten by
     the savage. We understand that when the prison is brought before the
     magistrates a remand will be applied for by the police, and that
     great developments are hoped from his capture."


     "Really we must see Baynes at once," cried Holmes, picking up his
     hat. "We will just catch him before he starts." We hurried down the
     village street and found, as we had expected, that the inspector was
     just leaving his lodgings.


     "You've seen the paper, Mr. Holmes?" he asked, holding one out to us.


     "Yes, Baynes, I've seen it. Pray don't think it a liberty if I give
     you a word of friendly warning."


     "Of warning, Mr. Holmes?"


     "I have looked into this case with some care, and I am not convinced
     that you are on the right lines. I don't want you to commit yourself
     too far unless you are sure."


     "You're very kind, Mr. Holmes."


     "I assure you I speak for your good."


     It seemed to me that something like a wink quivered for an instant
     over one of Mr. Baynes's tiny eyes.


     "We agreed to work on our own lines, Mr. Holmes. That's what I am
     doing."


     "Oh, very good," said Holmes. "Don't blame me."


     "No, sir; I believe you mean well by me. But we all have our own
     systems, Mr. Holmes. You have yours, and maybe I have mine."


     "Let us say no more about it."


     "You're welcome always to my news. This fellow is a perfect savage,
     as strong as a cart-horse and as fierce as the devil. He chewed
     Downing's thumb nearly off before they could master him. He hardly
     speaks a word of English, and we can get nothing out of him but
     grunts."


     "And you think you have evidence that he murdered his late master?"


     "I didn't say so, Mr. Holmes; I didn't say so. We all have our little
     ways. You try yours and I will try mine. That's the agreement."


     Holmes shrugged his shoulders as we walked away together. "I can't
     make the man out. He seems to be riding for a fall. Well, as he says,
     we must each try our own way and see what comes of it. But there's
     something in Inspector Baynes which I can't quite understand."


     "Just sit down in that chair, Watson," said Sherlock Holmes when we
     had returned to our apartment at the Bull. "I want to put you in
     touch with the situation, as I may need your help to-night. Let me
     show you the evolution of this case so far as I have been able to
     follow it. Simple as it has been in its leading features, it has none
     the less presented surprising difficulties in the way of an arrest.
     There are gaps in that direction which we have still to fill.


     "We will go back to the note which was handed in to Garcia upon the
     evening of his death. We may put aside this idea of Baynes's that
     Garcia's servants were concerned in the matter. The proof of this
     lies in the fact that it was he who had arranged for the presence of
     Scott Eccles, which could only have been done for the purpose of an
     alibi. It was Garcia, then, who had an enterprise, and apparently a
     criminal enterprise, in hand that night in the course of which he met
     his death. I say 'criminal' because only a man with a criminal
     enterprise desires to establish an alibi. Who, then, is most likely
     to have taken his life? Surely the person against whom the criminal
     enterprise was directed. So far it seems to me that we are on safe
     ground.


     "We can now see a reason for the disappearance of Garcia's household.
     They were all confederates in the same unknown crime. If it came off
     when Garcia returned, any possible suspicion would be warded off by
     the Englishman's evidence, and all would be well. But the attempt was
     a dangerous one, and if Garcia did not return by a certain hour it
     was probable that his own life had been sacrificed. It had been
     arranged, therefore, that in such a case his two subordinates were to
     make for some prearranged spot where they could escape investigation
     and be in a position afterwards to renew their attempt. That would
     fully explain the facts, would it not?"


     The whole inexplicable tangle seemed to straighten out before me. I
     wondered, as I always did, how it had not been obvious to me before.


     "But why should one servant return?"


     "We can imagine that in the confusion of flight something precious,
     something which he could not bear to part with, had been left behind.
     That would explain his persistence, would it not?"


     "Well, what is the next step?"


     "The next step is the note received by Garcia at the dinner. It
     indicates a confederate at the other end. Now, where was the other
     end? I have already shown you that it could only lie in some large
     house, and that the number of large houses is limited. My first days
     in this village were devoted to a series of walks in which in the
     intervals of my botanical researches I made a reconnaissance of all
     the large houses and an examination of the family history of the
     occupants. One house, and only one, riveted my attention. It is the
     famous old Jacobean grange of High Gable, one mile on the farther
     side of Oxshott, and less than half a mile from the scene of the
     tragedy. The other mansions belonged to prosaic and respectable
     people who live far aloof from romance. But Mr. Henderson, of High
     Gable, was by all accounts a curious man to whom curious adventures
     might befall. I concentrated my attention, therefore, upon him and
     his household.


     "A singular set of people, Watson--the man himself the most singular
     of them all. I managed to see him on a plausible pretext, but I
     seemed to read in his dark, deepset, brooding eyes that he was
     perfectly aware of my true business. He is a man of fifty, strong,
     active, with iron-gray hair, great bunched black eyebrows, the step
     of a deer and the air of an emperor--a fierce, masterful man, with a
     red-hot spirit behind his parchment face. He is either a foreigner or
     has lived long in the tropics, for he is yellow and sapless, but
     tough as whipcord. His friend and secretary, Mr. Lucas, is
     undoubtedly a foreigner, chocolate brown, wily, suave, and catlike,
     with a poisonous gentleness of speech. You see, Watson, we have come
     already upon two sets of foreigners--one at Wisteria Lodge and one at
     High Gable--so our gaps are beginning to close.


     "These two men, close and confidential friends, are the centre of the
     household; but there is one other person who for our immediate
     purpose may be even more important. Henderson has two children--girls
     of eleven and thirteen. Their governess is a Miss Burnet, an
     Englishwoman of forty or thereabouts. There is also one confidential
     manservant. This little group forms the real family, for their travel
     about together, and Henderson is a great traveller, always on the
     move. It is only within the last weeks that he has returned, after a
     year's absence, to High Gable. I may add that he is enormously rich,
     and whatever his whims may be he can very easily satisfy them. For
     the rest, his house is full of butlers, footmen, maidservants, and
     the usual overfed, underworked staff of a large English country
     house.


     "So much I learned partly from village gossip and partly from my own
     observation. There are no better instruments than discharged servants
     with a grievance, and I was lucky enough to find one. I call it luck,
     but it would not have come my way had I not been looking out for it.
     As Baynes remarks, we all have our systems. It was my system which
     enabled me to find John Warner, late gardener of High Gable, sacked
     in a moment of temper by his imperious employer. He in turn had
     friends among the indoor servants who unite in their fear and dislike
     of their master. So I had my key to the secrets of the establishment.


     "Curious people, Watson! I don't pretend to understand it all yet,
     but very curious people anyway. It's a double-winged house, and the
     servants live on one side, the family on the other. There's no link
     between the two save for Henderson's own servant, who serves the
     family's meals. Everything is carried to a certain door, which forms
     the one connection. Governess and children hardly go out at all,
     except into the garden. Henderson never by any chance walks alone.
     His dark secretary is like his shadow. The gossip among the servants
     is that their master is terribly afraid of something. 'Sold his soul
     to the devil in exchange for money,' says Warner, 'and expects his
     creditor to come up and claim his own.' Where they came from, or who
     they are, nobody has an idea. They are very violent. Twice Henderson
     has lashed at folk with his dog-whip, and only his long purse and
     heavy compensation have kept him out of the courts.


     "Well, now, Watson, let us judge the situation by this new
     information. We may take it that the letter came out of this strange
     household and was an invitation to Garcia to carry out some attempt
     which had already been planned. Who wrote the note? It was someone
     within the citadel, and it was a woman. Who then but Miss Burnet, the
     governess? All our reasoning seems to point that way. At any rate, we
     may take it as a hypothesis and see what consequences it would
     entail. I may add that Miss Burnet's age and character make it
     certain that my first idea that there might be a love interest in our
     story is out of the question.


     "If she wrote the note she was presumably the friend and confederate
     of Garcia. What, then, might she be expected to do if she heard of
     his death? If he met it in some nefarious enterprise her lips might
     be sealed. Still, in her heart, she must retain bitterness and hatred
     against those who had killed him and would presumably help so far as
     she could to have revenge upon them. Could we see her, then and try
     to use her? That was my first thought. But now we come to a sinister
     fact. Miss Burnet has not been seen by any human eye since the night
     of the murder. From that evening she has utterly vanished. Is she
     alive? Has she perhaps met her end on the same night as the friend
     whom she had summoned? Or is she merely a prisoner? There is the
     point which we still have to decide.


     "You will appreciate the difficulty of the situation, Watson. There
     is nothing upon which we can apply for a warrant. Our whole scheme
     might seem fantastic if laid before a magistrate. The woman's
     disappearance counts for nothing, since in that extraordinary
     household any member of it might be invisible for a week. And yet she
     may at the present moment be in danger of her life. All I can do is
     to watch the house and leave my agent, Warner, on guard at the gates.
     We can't let such a situation continue. If the law can do nothing we
     must take the risk ourselves."


     "What do you suggest?"


     "I know which is her room.  It is accessible from the top of an
     outhouse.  My suggestion is that you and I go to-night and see if we
     can strike at the very heart of the mystery."


     It was not, I must confess, a very alluring prospect. The old house
     with its atmosphere of murder, the singular and formidable
     inhabitants, the unknown dangers of the approach, and the fact that
     we were putting ourselves legally in a false position all combined to
     damp my ardour. But there was something in the ice-cold reasoning of
     Holmes which made it impossible to shrink from any adventure which he
     might recommend. One knew that thus, and only thus, could a solution
     be found. I clasped his hand in silence, and the die was cast.


     But it was not destined that our investigation should have so
     adventurous an ending. It was about five o'clock, and the shadows of
     the March evening were beginning to fall, when an excited rustic
     rushed into our room.


     "They've gone, Mr. Holmes. They went by the last train. The lady
     broke away, and I've got her in a cab downstairs."


     "Excellent, Warner!" cried Holmes, springing to his feet. "Watson,
     the gaps are closing rapidly."


     In the cab was a woman, half-collapsed from nervous exhaustion. She
     bore upon her aquiline and emaciated face the traces of some recent
     tragedy. Her head hung listlessly upon her breast, but as she raised
     it and turned her dull eyes upon us I saw that her pupils were dark
     dots in the centre of the broad gray iris. She was drugged with
     opium.


     "I watched at the gate, same as you advised, Mr. Holmes," said our
     emissary, the discharged gardener. "When the carriage came out I
     followed it to the station. She was like one walking in her sleep,
     but when they tried to get her into the train she came to life and
     struggled. They pushed her into the carriage. She fought her way out
     again. I took her part, got her into a cab, and here we are. I shan't
     forget the face at the carriage window as I led her away. I'd have a
     short life if he had his way--the black-eyed, scowling, yellow
     devil."


     We carried her upstairs, laid her on the sofa, and a couple of cups
     of the strongest coffee soon cleared her brain from the mists of the
     drug. Baynes had been summoned by Holmes, and the situation rapidly
     explained to him.


     "Why, sir, you've got me the very evidence I want," said the
     inspector warmly, shaking my friend by the hand. "I was on the same
     scent as you from the first."


     "What! You were after Henderson?"


     "Why, Mr. Holmes, when you were crawling in the shrubbery at High
     Gable I was up one of the trees in the plantation and saw you down
     below. It was just who would get his evidence first."


     "Then why did you arrest the mulatto?"


     Baynes chuckled.


     "I was sure Henderson, as he calls himself, felt that he was
     suspected, and that he would lie low and make no move so long as he
     thought he was in any danger. I arrested the wrong man to make him
     believe that our eyes were off him. I knew he would be likely to
     clear off then and give us a chance of getting at Miss Burnet."


     Holmes laid his hand upon the inspector's shoulder.


     "You will rise high in your profession. You have instinct and
     intuition," said he.


     Baynes flushed with pleasure.


     "I've had a plain-clothes man waiting at the station all the week.
     Wherever the High Gable folk go he will keep them in sight. But he
     must have been hard put to it when Miss Burnet broke away. However,
     your man picked her up, and it all ends well. We can't arrest without
     her evidence, that is clear, so the sooner we get a statement the
     better."


     "Every minute she gets stronger," said Holmes, glancing at the
     governess. "But tell me, Baynes, who is this man Henderson?"


     "Henderson," the inspector answered, "is Don Murillo, once called the
     Tiger of San Pedro."


     The Tiger of San Pedro! The whole history of the man came back to me
     in a flash. He had made his name as the most lewd and bloodthirsty
     tyrant that had ever governed any country with a pretence to
     civilization. Strong, fearless, and energetic, he had sufficient
     virtue to enable him to impose his odious vices upon a cowering
     people for ten or twelve years. His name was a terror through all
     Central America. At the end of that time there was a universal rising
     against him. But he was as cunning as he was cruel, and at the first
     whisper of coming trouble he had secretly conveyed his treasures
     aboard a ship which was manned by devoted adherents. It was an empty
     palace which was stormed by the insurgents next day. The dictator,
     his two children, his secretary, and his wealth had all escaped them.
     From that moment he had vanished from the world, and his identity had
     been a frequent subject for comment in the European press.


     "Yes, sir, Don Murillo, the Tiger of San Pedro," said Baynes. "If you
     look it up you will find that the San Pedro colours are green and
     white, same as in the note, Mr. Holmes. Henderson he called himself,
     but I traced him back, Paris and Rome and Madrid to Barcelona, where
     his ship came in in '86. They've been looking for him all the time
     for their revenge, but it is only now that they have begun to find
     him out."


     "They discovered him a year ago," said Miss Burnet, who had sat up
     and was now intently following the conversation. "Once already his
     life has been attempted, but some evil spirit shielded him. Now,
     again, it is the noble, chivalrous Garcia who has fallen, while the
     monster goes safe. But another will come, and yet another, until some
     day justice will be done; that is as certain as the rise of
     to-morrow's sun." Her thin hands clenched, and her worn face blanched
     with the passion of her hatred.


     "But how come you into this matter, Miss Burnet?" asked Holmes. "How
     can an English lady join in such a murderous affair?"


     "I join in it because there is no other way in the world by which
     justice can be gained. What does the law of England care for the
     rivers of blood shed years ago in San Pedro, or for the shipload of
     treasure which this man has stolen? To you they are like crimes
     committed in some other planet. But we know. We have learned the
     truth in sorrow and in suffering. To us there is no fiend in hell
     like Juan Murillo, and no peace in life while his victims still cry
     for vengeance."


     "No doubt," said Holmes, "he was as you say. I have heard that he was
     atrocious. But how are you affected?"


     "I will tell you it all. This villain's policy was to murder, on one
     pretext or another, every man who showed such promise that he might
     in time come to be a dangerous rival. My husband--yes, my real name
     is Signora Victor Durando--was the San Pedro minister in London. He
     met me and married me there. A nobler man never lived upon earth.
     Unhappily, Murillo heard of his excellence, recalled him on some
     pretext, and had him shot. With a premonition of his fate he had
     refused to take me with him. His estates were confiscated, and I was
     left with a pittance and a broken heart.


     "Then came the downfall of the tyrant. He escaped as you have just
     described. But the many whose lives he had ruined, whose nearest and
     dearest had suffered torture and death at his hands, would not let
     the matter rest. They banded themselves into a society which should
     never be dissolved until the work was done. It was my part after we
     had discovered in the transformed Henderson the fallen despot, to
     attach myself to his household and keep the others in touch with his
     movements. This I was able to do by securing the position of
     governess in his family. He little knew that the woman who faced him
     at every meal was the woman whose husband he had hurried at an hour's
     notice into eternity. I smiled on him, did my duty to his children,
     and bided my time. An attempt was made in Paris and failed. We
     zig-zagged swiftly here and there over Europe to throw off the
     pursuers and finally returned to this house, which he had taken upon
     his first arrival in England.


     "But here also the ministers of justice were waiting. Knowing that he
     would return there, Garcia, who is the son of the former highest
     dignitary in San Pedro, was waiting with two trusty companions of
     humble station, all three fired with the same reasons for revenge. He
     could do little during the day, for Murillo took every precaution and
     never went out save with his satellite Lucas, or Lopez as he was
     known in the days of his greatness. At night, however, he slept
     alone, and the avenger might find him. On a certain evening, which
     had been prearranged, I sent my friend final instructions, for the
     man was forever on the alert and continually changed his room. I was
     to see that the doors were open and the signal of a green or white
     light in a window which faced the drive was to give notice if all was
     safe or if the attempt had better be postponed.


     "But everything went wrong with us. In some way I had excited the
     suspicion of Lopez, the secretary. He crept up behind me and sprang
     upon me just as I had finished the note. He and his master dragged me
     to my room and held judgment upon me as a convicted traitress. Then
     and there they would have plunged their knives into me could they
     have seen how to escape the consequences of the deed. Finally, after
     much debate, they concluded that my murder was too dangerous. But
     they determined to get rid forever of Garcia. They had gagged me, and
     Murillo twisted my arm round until I gave him the address. I swear
     that he might have twisted it off had I understood what it would mean
     to Garcia. Lopez addressed the note which I had written, sealed it
     with his sleeve-link, and sent it by the hand of the servant, Jose.
     How they murdered him I do not know, save that it was Murillo's hand
     who struck him down, for Lopez had remained to guard me. I believe he
     must have waited among the gorse bushes through which the path winds
     and struck him down as he passed. At first they were of a mind to let
     him enter the house and to kill him as a detected burglar; but they
     argued that if they were mixed up in an inquiry their own identity
     would at once be publicly disclosed and they would be open to further
     attacks. With the death of Garcia, the pursuit might cease, since
     such a death might frighten others from the task.


     "All would now have been well for them had it not been for my
     knowledge of what they had done. I have no doubt that there were
     times when my life hung in the balance. I was confined to my room,
     terrorized by the most horrible threats, cruelly ill-used to break my
     spirit--see this stab on my shoulder and the bruises from end to end
     of my arms--and a gag was thrust into my mouth on the one occasion
     when I tried to call from the window. For five days this cruel
     imprisonment continued, with hardly enough food to hold body and soul
     together. This afternoon a good lunch was brought me, but the moment
     after I took it I knew that I had been drugged. In a sort of dream I
     remember being half-led, half-carried to the carriage; in the same
     state I was conveyed to the train. Only then, when the wheels were
     almost moving, did I suddenly realize that my liberty lay in my own
     hands. I sprang out, they tried to drag me back, and had it not been
     for the help of this good man, who led me to the cab, I should never
     had broken away. Now, thank God, I am beyond their power forever."


     We had all listened intently to this remarkable statement. It was
     Holmes who broke the silence.


     "Our difficulties are not over," he remarked, shaking his head. "Our
     police work ends, but our legal work begins."


     "Exactly," said I. "A plausible lawyer could make it out as an act of
     self-defence. There may be a hundred crimes in the background, but it
     is only on this one that they can be tried."


     "Come, come," said Baynes cheerily, "I think better of the law than
     that. Self-defence is one thing. To entice a man in cold blood with
     the object of murdering him is another, whatever danger you may fear
     from him. No, no, we shall all be justified when we see the tenants
     of High Gable at the next Guildford Assizes."


     It is a matter of history, however, that a little time was still to
     elapse before the Tiger of San Pedro should meet with his deserts.
     Wily and bold, he and his companion threw their pursuer off their
     track by entering a lodging-house in Edmonton Street and leaving by
     the back-gate into Curzon Square. From that day they were seen no
     more in England. Some six months afterwards the Marquess of Montalva
     and Signor Rulli, his secretary, were both murdered in their rooms at
     the Hotel Escurial at Madrid. The crime was ascribed to Nihilism, and
     the murderers were never arrested. Inspector Baynes visited us at
     Baker Street with a printed description of the dark face of the
     secretary, and of the masterful features, the magnetic black eyes,
     and the tufted brows of his master. We could not doubt that justice,
     if belated, had come at last.


     "A chaotic case, my dear Watson," said Holmes over an evening pipe.
     "It will not be possible for you to present in that compact form
     which is dear to your heart. It covers two continents, concerns two
     groups of mysterious persons, and is further complicated by the
     highly respectable presence of our friend, Scott Eccles, whose
     inclusion shows me that the deceased Garcia had a scheming mind and a
     well-developed instinct of self-preservation. It is remarkable only
     for the fact that amid a perfect jungle of possibilities we, with our
     worthy collaborator, the inspector, have kept our close hold on the
     essentials and so been guided along the crooked and winding path. Is
     there any point which is not quite clear to you?"


     "The object of the mulatto cook's return?"


     "I think that the strange creature in the kitchen may account for it.
     The man was a primitive savage from the backwoods of San Pedro, and
     this was his fetish. When his companion and he had fled to some
     prearranged retreat--already occupied, no doubt by a confederate--the
     companion had persuaded him to leave so compromising an article of
     furniture. But the mulatto's heart was with it, and he was driven
     back to it next day, when, on reconnoitering through the window, he
     found policeman Walters in possession. He waited three days longer,
     and then his piety or his superstition drove him to try once more.
     Inspector Baynes, who, with his usual astuteness, had minimized the
     incident before me, had really recognized its importance and had left
     a trap into which the creature walked. Any other point, Watson?"


     "The torn bird, the pail of blood, the charred bones, all the mystery
     of that weird kitchen?"


     Holmes smiled as he turned up an entry in his note-book.


     "I spent a morning in the British Museum reading up on that and other
     points. Here is a quotation from Eckermann's Voodooism and the
     Negroid Religions:


     "'The true voodoo-worshipper attempts nothing of importance without
     certain sacrifices which are intended to propitiate his unclean gods.
     In extreme cases these rites take the form of human sacrifices
     followed by cannibalism. The more usual victims are a white cock,
     which is plucked in pieces alive, or a black goat, whose throat is
     cut and body burned.'


     "So you see our savage friend was very orthodox in his ritual. It is
     grotesque, Watson," Holmes added, as he slowly fastened his notebook,
     "but, as I have had occasion to remark, there is but one step from
     the grotesque to the horrible."


















     ----------
     This text is provided to you "as-is" without any warranty. No
     warranties of any kind, expressed or implied, are made to you as to
     the text or any medium it may be on, including but not limited to
     warranties of merchantablity or fitness for a particular purpose.


     This text was formatted from various free ASCII and HTML variants.
     See http://sherlock-holm.es for an electronic form of this text and
     additional information about it.


     This text comes from the collection's version 3.1.
























                        THE ADVENTURE OF THE DEVIL'S FOOT


                               Arthur Conan Doyle






     In recording from time to time some of the curious experiences and
     interesting recollections which I associate with my long and intimate
     friendship with Mr. Sherlock Holmes, I have continually been faced by
     difficulties caused by his own aversion to publicity. To his sombre
     and cynical spirit all popular applause was always abhorrent, and
     nothing amused him more at the end of a successful case than to hand
     over the actual exposure to some orthodox official, and to listen
     with a mocking smile to the general chorus of misplaced
     congratulation. It was indeed this attitude upon the part of my
     friend and certainly not any lack of interesting material which has
     caused me of late years to lay very few of my records before the
     public. My participation in some if his adventures was always a
     privilege which entailed discretion and reticence upon me.


     It was, then, with considerable surprise that I received a telegram
     from Homes last Tuesday--he has never been known to write where a
     telegram would serve--in the following terms:


     Why not tell them of the Cornish horror--strangest case I have
     handled.
     I have no idea what backward sweep of memory had brought the matter
     fresh to his mind, or what freak had caused him to desire that I
     should recount it; but I hasten, before another cancelling telegram
     may arrive, to hunt out the notes which give me the exact details of
     the case and to lay the narrative before my readers.


     It was, then, in the spring of the year 1897 that Holmes's iron
     constitution showed some symptoms of giving way in the face of
     constant hard work of a most exacting kind, aggravated, perhaps, by
     occasional indiscretions of his own. In March of that year Dr. Moore
     Agar, of Harley Street, whose dramatic introduction to Holmes I may
     some day recount, gave positive injunctions that the famous private
     agent lay aside all his cases and surrender himself to complete rest
     if he wished to avert an absolute breakdown. The state of his health
     was not a matter in which he himself took the faintest interest, for
     his mental detachment was absolute, but he was induced at last, on
     the threat of being permanently disqualified from work, to give
     himself a complete change of scene and air. Thus it was that in the
     early spring of that year we found ourselves together in a small
     cottage near Poldhu Bay, at the further extremity of the Cornish
     peninsula.


     It was a singular spot, and one peculiarly well suited to the grim
     humour of my patient. From the windows of our little whitewashed
     house, which stood high upon a grassy headland, we looked down upon
     the whole sinister semicircle of Mounts Bay, that old death trap of
     sailing vessels, with its fringe of black cliffs and surge-swept
     reefs on which innumerable seamen have met their end. With a
     northerly breeze it lies placid and sheltered, inviting the
     storm-tossed craft to tack into it for rest and protection.


     Then come the sudden swirl round of the wind, the blistering gale
     from the south-west, the dragging anchor, the lee shore, and the last
     battle in the creaming breakers. The wise mariner stands far out from
     that evil place.


     On the land side our surroundings were as sombre as on the sea. It
     was a country of rolling moors, lonely and dun-colored, with an
     occasional church tower to mark the site of some old-world village.
     In every direction upon these moors there were traces of some
     vanished race which had passed utterly away, and left as it sole
     record strange monuments of stone, irregular mounds which contained
     the burned ashes of the dead, and curious earthworks which hinted at
     prehistoric strife. The glamour and mystery of the place, with its
     sinister atmosphere of forgotten nations, appealed to the imagination
     of my friend, and he spent much of his time in long walks and
     solitary meditations upon the moor. The ancient Cornish language had
     also arrested his attention, and he had, I remember, conceived the
     idea that it was akin to the Chaldean, and had been largely derived
     from the Phoenician traders in tin. He had received a consignment of
     books upon philology and was settling down to develop this thesis
     when suddenly, to my sorrow and to his unfeigned delight, we found
     ourselves, even in that land of dreams, plunged into a problem at our
     very doors which was more intense, more engrossing, and infinitely
     more mysterious than any of those which had driven us from London.
     Our simple life and peaceful, healthy routine were violently
     interrupted, and we were precipitated into the midst of a series of
     events which caused the utmost excitement not only in Cornwall but
     throughout the whole west of England. Many of my readers may retain
     some recollection of what was called at the time "The Cornish
     Horror," though a most imperfect account of the matter reached the
     London press. Now, after thirteen years, I will give the true details
     of this inconceivable affair to the public.


     I have said that scattered towers marked the villages which dotted
     this part of Cornwall. The nearest of these was the hamlet of
     Tredannick Wollas, where the cottages of a couple of hundred
     inhabitants clustered round an ancient, moss-grown church. The vicar
     of the parish, Mr. Roundhay, was something of an archaeologist, and
     as such Holmes had made his acquaintance. He was a middle-aged man,
     portly and affable, with a considerable fund of local lore. At his
     invitation we had taken tea at the vicarage and had come to know,
     also, Mr. Mortimer Tregennis, an independent gentleman, who increased
     the clergyman's scanty resources by taking rooms in his large,
     straggling house. The vicar, being a bachelor, was glad to come to
     such an arrangement, though he had little in common with his lodger,
     who was a thin, dark, spectacled man, with a stoop which gave the
     impression of actual, physical deformity. I remember that during our
     short visit we found the vicar garrulous, but his lodger strangely
     reticent, a sad-faced, introspective man, sitting with averted eyes,
     brooding apparently upon his own affairs.


     These were the two men who entered abruptly into our little
     sitting-room on Tuesday, March the 16th, shortly after our breakfast
     hour, as we were smoking together, preparatory to our daily excursion
     upon the moors.


     "Mr. Holmes," said the vicar in an agitated voice, "the most
     extraordinary and tragic affair has occurred during the night. It is
     the most unheard-of business. We can only regard it as a special
     Providence that you should chance to be here at the time, for in all
     England you are the one man we need."


     I glared at the intrusive vicar with no very friendly eyes; but
     Holmes took his pipe from his lips and sat up in his chair like an
     old hound who hears the view-halloa. He waved his hand to the sofa,
     and our palpitating visitor with his agitated companion sat side by
     side upon it. Mr. Mortimer Tregennis was more self-contained than the
     clergyman, but the twitching of his thin hands and the brightness of
     his dark eyes showed that they shared a common emotion.


     "Shall I speak or you?" he asked of the vicar.


     "Well, as you seem to have made the discovery, whatever it may be,
     and the vicar to have had it second-hand, perhaps you had better do
     the speaking," said Holmes.


     I glanced at the hastily clad clergyman, with the formally dressed
     lodger seated beside him, and was amused at the surprise which
     Holmes's simple deduction had brought to their faces.


     "Perhaps I had best say a few words first," said the vicar, "and then
     you can judge if you will listen to the details from Mr. Tregennis,
     or whether we should not hasten at once to the scene of this
     mysterious affair. I may explain, then, that our friend here spent
     last evening in the company of his two brothers, Owen and George, and
     of his sister Brenda, at their house of Tredannick Wartha, which is
     near the old stone cross upon the moor. He left them shortly after
     ten o'clock, playing cards round the dining-room table, in excellent
     health and spirits. This morning, being an early riser, he walked in
     that direction before breakfast and was overtaken by the carriage of
     Dr. Richards, who explained that he had just been sent for on a most
     urgent call to Tredannick Wartha. Mr. Mortimer Tregennis naturally
     went with him. When he arrived at Tredannick Wartha he found an
     extraordinary state of things. His two brothers and his sister were
     seated round the table exactly as he had left them, the cards still
     spread in front of them and the candles burned down to their sockets.
     The sister lay back stone-dead in her chair, while the two brothers
     sat on each side of her laughing, shouting, and singing, the senses
     stricken clean out of them. All three of them, the dead woman and the
     two demented men, retained upon their faces an expression of the
     utmost horror--a convulsion of terror which was dreadful to look
     upon. There was no sign of the presence of anyone in the house,
     except Mrs. Porter, the old cook and housekeeper, who declared that
     she had slept deeply and heard no sound during the night. Nothing had
     been stolen or disarranged, and there is absolutely no explanation of
     what the horror can be which has frightened a woman to death and two
     strong men out of their senses. There is the situation, Mr. Holmes,
     in a nutshell, and if you can help us to clear it up you will have
     done a great work."


     I had hoped that in some way I could coax my companion back into the
     quiet which had been the object of our journey; but one glance at his
     intense face and contracted eyebrows told me how vain was now the
     expectation. He sat for some little time in silence, absorbed in the
     strange drama which had broken in upon our peace.


     "I will look into this matter," he said at last. "On the face of it,
     it would appear to be a case of a very exceptional nature. Have you
     been there yourself, Mr. Roundhay?"


     "No, Mr. Holmes. Mr. Tregennis brought back the account to the
     vicarage, and I at once hurried over with him to consult you."


     "How far is it to the house where this singular tragedy occurred?"


     "About a mile inland."


     "Then we shall walk over together. But before we start I must ask you
     a few questions, Mr. Mortimer Tregennis."


     The other had been silent all this time, but I had observed that his
     more controlled excitement was even greater than the obtrusive
     emotion of the clergyman. He sat with a pale, drawn face, his anxious
     gaze fixed upon Holmes, and his thin hands clasped convulsively
     together. His pale lips quivered as he listened to the dreadful
     experience which had befallen his family, and his dark eyes seemed to
     reflect something of the horror of the scene.


     "Ask what you like, Mr. Holmes," said he eagerly. "It is a bad thing
     to speak of, but I will answer you the truth."


     "Tell me about last night."


     "Well, Mr. Holmes, I supped there, as the vicar has said, and my
     elder brother George proposed a game of whist afterwards. We sat down
     about nine o'clock. It was a quarter-past ten when I moved to go. I
     left them all round the table, as merry as could be."


     "Who let you out?"


     "Mrs. Porter had gone to bed, so I let myself out. I shut the hall
     door behind me. The window of the room in which they sat was closed,
     but the blind was not drawn down. There was no change in door or
     window this morning, or any reason to think that any stranger had
     been to the house. Yet there they sat, driven clean mad with terror,
     and Brenda lying dead of fright, with her head hanging over the arm
     of the chair. I'll never get the sight of that room out of my mind so
     long as I live."


     "The facts, as you state them, are certainly most remarkable," said
     Holmes. "I take it that you have no theory yourself which can in any
     way account for them?"


     "It's devilish, Mr. Holmes, devilish!" cried Mortimer Tregennis. "It
     is not of this world. Something has come into that room which has
     dashed the light of reason from their minds. What human contrivance
     could do that?"


     "I fear," said Holmes, "that if the matter is beyond humanity it is
     certainly beyond me. Yet we must exhaust all natural explanations
     before we fall back upon such a theory as this. As to yourself, Mr.
     Tregennis, I take it you were divided in some way from your family,
     since they lived together and you had rooms apart?"


     "That is so, Mr. Holmes, though the matter is past and done with. We
     were a family of tin-miners at Redruth, but we sold our venture to a
     company, and so retired with enough to keep us. I won't deny that
     there was some feeling about the division of the money and it stood
     between us for a time, but it was all forgiven and forgotten, and we
     were the best of friends together."


     "Looking back at the evening which you spent together, does anything
     stand out in your memory as throwing any possible light upon the
     tragedy? Think carefully, Mr. Tregennis, for any clue which can help
     me."


     "There is nothing at all, sir."


     "Your people were in their usual spirits?"


     "Never better."


     "Were they nervous people? Did they ever show any apprehension of
     coming danger?"


     "Nothing of the kind."


     "You have nothing to add then, which could assist me?"


     Mortimer Tregennis considered earnestly for a moment.


     "There is one thing occurs to me," said he at last. "As we sat at the
     table my back was to the window, and my brother George, he being my
     partner at cards, was facing it. I saw him once look hard over my
     shoulder, so I turned round and looked also. The blind was up and the
     window shut, but I could just make out the bushes on the lawn, and it
     seemed to me for a moment that I saw something moving among them. I
     couldn't even say if it was man or animal, but I just thought there
     was something there. When I asked him what he was looking at, he told
     me that he had the same feeling. That is all that I can say."


     "Did you not investigate?"


     "No; the matter passed as unimportant."


     "You left them, then, without any premonition of evil?"


     "None at all."


     "I am not clear how you came to hear the news so early this morning."


     "I am an early riser and generally take a walk before breakfast. This
     morning I had hardly started when the doctor in his carriage overtook
     me. He told me that old Mrs. Porter had sent a boy down with an
     urgent message. I sprang in beside him and we drove on. When we got
     there we looked into that dreadful room. The candles and the fire
     must have burned out hours before, and they had been sitting there in
     the dark until dawn had broken. The doctor said Brenda must have been
     dead at least six hours. There were no signs of violence. She just
     lay across the arm of the chair with that look on her face. George
     and Owen were singing snatches of songs and gibbering like two great
     apes. Oh, it was awful to see! I couldn't stand it, and the doctor
     was as white as a sheet. Indeed, he fell into a chair in a sort of
     faint, and we nearly had him on our hands as well."


     "Remarkable--most remarkable!" said Holmes, rising and taking his
     hat. "I think, perhaps, we had better go down to Tredannick Wartha
     without further delay. I confess that I have seldom known a case
     which at first sight presented a more singular problem."


     Our proceedings of that first morning did little to advance the
     investigation. It was marked, however, at the outset by an incident
     which left the most sinister impression upon my mind. The approach to
     the spot at which the tragedy occurred is down a narrow, winding,
     country lane. While we made our way along it we heard the rattle of a
     carriage coming towards us and stood aside to let it pass. As it
     drove by us I caught a glimpse through the closed window of a
     horribly contorted, grinning face glaring out at us. Those staring
     eyes and gnashing teeth flashed past us like a dreadful vision.


     "My brothers!" cried Mortimer Tregennis, white to his lips. "They are
     taking them to Helston."


     We looked with horror after the black carriage, lumbering upon its
     way. Then we turned our steps towards this ill-omened house in which
     they had met their strange fate.


     It was a large and bright dwelling, rather a villa than a cottage,
     with a considerable garden which was already, in that Cornish air,
     well filled with spring flowers. Towards this garden the window of
     the sitting-room fronted, and from it, according to Mortimer
     Tregennis, must have come that thing of evil which had by sheer
     horror in a single instant blasted their minds. Holmes walked slowly
     and thoughtfully among the flower-plots and along the path before we
     entered the porch. So absorbed was he in his thoughts, I remember,
     that he stumbled over the watering-pot, upset its contents, and
     deluged both our feet and the garden path. Inside the house we were
     met by the elderly Cornish housekeeper, Mrs. Porter, who, with the
     aid of a young girl, looked after the wants of the family. She
     readily answered all Holmes's questions. She had heard nothing in the
     night. Her employers had all been in excellent spirits lately, and
     she had never known them more cheerful and prosperous. She had
     fainted with horror upon entering the room in the morning and seeing
     that dreadful company round the table. She had, when she recovered,
     thrown open the window to let the morning air in, and had run down to
     the lane, whence she sent a farm-lad for the doctor. The lady was on
     her bed upstairs if we cared to see her. It took four strong men to
     get the brothers into the asylum carriage. She would not herself stay
     in the house another day and was starting that very afternoon to
     rejoin her family at St. Ives.


     We ascended the stairs and viewed the body. Miss Brenda Tregennis had
     been a very beautiful girl, though now verging upon middle age. Her
     dark, clear-cut face was handsome, even in death, but there still
     lingered upon it something of that convulsion of horror which had
     been her last human emotion. From her bedroom we descended to the
     sitting-room, where this strange tragedy had actually occurred. The
     charred ashes of the overnight fire lay in the grate. On the table
     were the four guttered and burned-out candles, with the cards
     scattered over its surface. The chairs had been moved back against
     the walls, but all else was as it had been the night before. Holmes
     paced with light, swift steps about the room; he sat in the various
     chairs, drawing them up and reconstructing their positions. He tested
     how much of the garden was visible; he examined the floor, the
     ceiling, and the fireplace; but never once did I see that sudden
     brightening of his eyes and tightening of his lips which would have
     told me that he saw some gleam of light in this utter darkness.


     "Why a fire?" he asked once. "Had they always a fire in this small
     room on a spring evening?"


     Mortimer Tregennis explained that the night was cold and damp. For
     that reason, after his arrival, the fire was lit. "What are you going
     to do now, Mr. Holmes?" he asked.


     My friend smiled and laid his hand upon my arm. "I think, Watson,
     that I shall resume that course of tobacco-poisoning which you have
     so often and so justly condemned," said he. "With your permission,
     gentlemen, we will now return to our cottage, for I am not aware that
     any new factor is likely to come to our notice here. I will turn the
     facts over in my mid, Mr, Tregennis, and should anything occur to me
     I will certainly ommunicate with you and the vicar. In the meantime I
     wish you both good-morning."


     It was not until long after we were back in Poldhu Cottage that
     Holmes broke his complete and absorbed silence. He sat coiled in his
     armchair, his haggard and ascetic face hardly visible amid the blue
     swirl of his tobacco smoke, his black brows drawn down, his forehead
     contracted, his eyes vacant and far away. Finally he laid down his
     pipe and sprang to his feet.


     "It won't do, Watson!" said he with a laugh. "Let us walk along the
     cliffs together and search for flint arrows. We are more likely to
     find them than clues to this problem. To let the brain work without
     sufficient material is like racing an engine. It racks itself to
     pieces. The sea air, sunshine, and patience, Watson--all else will
     come.


     "Now, let us calmly define our position, Watson," he continued as we
     skirted the cliffs together. "Let us get a firm grip of the very
     little which we do know, so that when fresh facts arise we may be
     ready to fit them into their places. I take it, in the first place,
     that neither of us is prepared to admit diabolical intrusions into
     the affairs of men. Let us begin by ruling that entirely out of our
     minds. Very good. There remain three persons who have been grievously
     stricken by some conscious or unconscious human agency. That is firm
     ground. Now, when did this occur? Evidently, assuming his narrative
     to be true, it was immediately after Mr. Mortimer Tregennis had left
     the room. That is a very important point. The presumption is that it
     was within a few minutes afterwards. The cards still lay upon the
     table. It was already past their usual hour for bed. Yet they had not
     changed their position or pushed back their chairs. I repeat, then,
     that the occurrence was immediately after his departure, and not
     later than eleven o'clock last night.


     "Our next obvious step is to check, so far as we can, the movements
     of Mortimer Tregennis after he left the room. In this there is no
     difficulty, and they seem to be above suspicion. Knowing my methods
     as you do, you were, of course, conscious of the somewhat clumsy
     water-pot expedient by which I obtained a clearer impress of his foot
     than might otherwise have been possible. The wet, sandy path took it
     admirably. Last night was also wet, you will remember, and it was not
     difficult--having obtained a sample print--to pick out his track
     among others and to follow his movements. He appears to have walked
     away swiftly in the direction of the vicarage.


     "If, then, Mortimer Tregennis disappeared from the scene, and yet
     some outside person affected the card-players, how can we reconstruct
     that person, and how was such an impression of horror conveyed? Mrs.
     Porter may be eliminated. She is evidently harmless. Is there any
     evidence that someone crept up to the garden window and in some
     manner produced so terrific an effect that he drove those who saw it
     out of their senses? The only suggestion in this direction comes from
     Mortimer Tregennis himself, who says that his brother spoke about
     some movement in the garden. That is certainly remarkable, as the
     night was rainy, cloudy, and dark. Anyone who had the design to alarm
     these people would be compelled to place his very face against the
     glass before he could be seen. There is a three-foot flower-border
     outside this window, but no indication of a footmark. It is difficult
     to imagine, then, how an outsider could have made so terrible an
     impression upon the company, nor have we found any possible motive
     for so strange and elaborate an attempt. You perceive our
     difficulties, Watson?"


     "They are only too clear," I answered with conviction.


     "And yet, with a little more material, we may prove that they are not
     insurmountable," said Holmes. "I fancy that among your extensive
     archives, Watson, you may find some which were nearly as obscure.
     Meanwhile, we shall put the case aside until more accurate data are
     available, and devote the rest of our morning to the pursuit of
     neolithic man."


     I may have commented upon my friend's power of mental detachment, but
     never have I wondered at it more than upon that spring morning in
     Cornwall when for two hours he discoursed upon celts, arrowheads, and
     shards, as lightly as if no sinister mystery were waiting for his
     solution. It was not until we had returned in the afternoon to our
     cottage that we found a visitor awaiting us, who soon brought our
     minds back to the matter in hand. Neither of us needed to be told who
     that visitor was. The huge body, the craggy and deeply seamed face
     with the fierce eyes and hawk-like nose, the grizzled hair which
     nearly brushed our cottage ceiling, the beard--golden at the fringes
     and white near the lips, save for the nicotine stain from his
     perpetual cigar--all these were as well known in London as in Africa,
     and could only be associated with the tremendous personality of Dr.
     Leon Sterndale, the great lion-hunter and explorer.


     We had heard of his presence in the district and had once or twice
     caught sight of his tall figure upon the moorland paths. He made no
     advances to us, however, nor would we have dreamed of doing so to
     him, as it was well known that it was his love of seclusion which
     caused him to spend the greater part of the intervals between his
     journeys in a small bungalow buried in the lonely wood of Beauchamp
     Arriance. Here, amid his books and his maps, he lived an absolutely
     lonely life, attending to his own simple wants and paying little
     apparent heed to the affairs of his neighbours. It was a surprise to
     me, therefore, to hear him asking Holmes in an eager voice whether he
     had made any advance in his reconstruction of this mysterious
     episode. "The county police are utterly at fault," said he, "but
     perhaps your wider experience has suggested some conceivable
     explanation. My only claim to being taken into your confidence is
     that during my many residences here I have come to know this family
     of Tregennis very well--indeed, upon my Cornish mother's side I could
     call them cousins--and their strange fate has naturally been a great
     shock to me. I may tell you that I had got as far as Plymouth upon my
     way to Africa, but the news reached me this morning, and I came
     straight back again to help in the inquiry."


     Holmes raised his eyebrows.


     "Did you lose your boat through it?"


     "I will take the next."


     "Dear me! that is friendship indeed."


     "I tell you they were relatives."


     "Quite so--cousins of your mother. Was your baggage aboard the ship?"


     "Some of it, but the main part at the hotel."


     "I see. But surely this event could not have found its way into the
     Plymouth morning papers."


     "No, sir; I had a telegram."


     "Might I ask from whom?"


     A shadow passed over the gaunt face of the explorer.


     "You are very inquisitive, Mr. Holmes."


     "It is my business."


     With an effort Dr. Sterndale recovered his ruffled composure.


     "I have no objection to telling you," he said. "It was Mr. Roundhay,
     the vicar, who sent me the telegram which recalled me."


     "Thank you," said Holmes. "I may say in answer to your original
     question that I have not cleared my mind entirely on the subject of
     this case, but that I have every hope of reaching some conclusion. It
     would be premature to say more."


     "Perhaps you would not mind telling me if your suspicions point in
     any particular direction?"


     "No, I can hardly answer that."


     "Then I have wasted my time and need not prolong my visit." The
     famous doctor strode out of our cottage in considerable ill-humour,
     and within five minutes Holmes had followed him. I saw him no more
     until the evening, when he returned with a slow step and haggard face
     which assured me that he had made no great progress with his
     investigation. He glanced at a telegram which awaited him and threw
     it into the grate.


     "From the Plymouth hotel, Watson," he said. "I learned the name of it
     from the vicar, and I wired to make certain that Dr. Leon Sterndale's
     account was true. It appears that he did indeed spend last night
     there, and that he has actually allowed some of his baggage to go on
     to Africa, while he returned to be present at this investigation.
     What do you make of that, Watson?"


     "He is deeply interested."


     "Deeply interested--yes. There is a thread here which we had not yet
     grasped and which might lead us through the tangle. Cheer up, Watson,
     for I am very sure that our material has not yet all come to hand.
     When it does we may soon leave our difficulties behind us."


     Little did I think how soon the words of Holmes would be realized, or
     how strange and sinister would be that new development which opened
     up an entirely fresh line of investigation. I was shaving at my
     window in the morning when I heard the rattle of hoofs and, looking
     up, saw a dog-cart coming at a gallop down the road. It pulled up at
     our door, and our friend, the vicar, sprang from it and rushed up our
     garden path. Holmes was already dressed, and we hastened down to meet
     him.


     Our visitor was so excited that he could hardly articulate, but at
     last in gasps and bursts his tragic story came out of him.


     "We are devil-ridden, Mr. Holmes! My poor parish is devil-ridden!" he
     cried. "Satan himself is loose in it! We are given over into his
     hands!" He danced about in his agitation, a ludicrous object if it
     were not for his ashy face and startled eyes. Finally he shot out his
     terrible news.


     "Mr. Mortimer Tregennis died during the night, and with exactly the
     same symptoms as the rest of his family."


     Holmes sprang to his feet, all energy in an instant.


     "Can you fit us both into your dog-cart?"


     "Yes, I can."


     "Then, Watson, we will postpone our breakfast. Mr. Roundhay, we are
     entirely at your disposal. Hurry--hurry, before things get
     disarranged."


     The lodger occupied two rooms at the vicarage, which were in an angle
     by themselves, the one above the other. Below was a large
     sitting-room; above, his bedroom. They looked out upon a croquet lawn
     which came up to the windows. We had arrived before the doctor or the
     police, so that everything was absolutely undisturbed. Let me
     describe exactly the scene as we saw it upon that misty March
     morning. It has left an impression which can never be effaced from my
     mind.


     The atmosphere of the room was of a horrible and depressing
     stuffiness. The servant who had first entered had thrown up the
     window, or it would have been even more intolerable. This might
     partly be due to the fact that a lamp stood flaring and smoking on
     the centre table. Beside it sat the dead man, leaning back in his
     chair, his thin beard projecting, his spectacles pushed up on to his
     forehead, and his lean dark face turned towards the window and
     twisted into the same distortion of terror which had marked the
     features of his dead sister. His limbs were convulsed and his fingers
     contorted as though he had died in a very paroxysm of fear. He was
     fully clothed, though there were signs that his dressing had been
     done in a hurry. We had already learned that his bed had been slept
     in, and that the tragic end had come to him in the early morning.


     One realized the red-hot energy which underlay Holmes's phlegmatic
     exterior when one saw the sudden change which came over him from the
     moment that he entered the fatal apartment. In an instant he was
     tense and alert, his eyes shining, his face set, his limbs quivering
     with eager activity. He was out on the lawn, in through the window,
     round the room, and up into the bedroom, for all the world like a
     dashing foxhound drawing a cover. In the bedroom he made a rapid cast
     around and ended by throwing open the window, which appeared to give
     him some fresh cause for excitement, for he leaned out of it with
     loud ejaculations of interest and delight. Then he rushed down the
     stair, out through the open window, threw himself upon his face on
     the lawn, sprang up and into the room once more, all with the energy
     of the hunter who is at the very heels of his quarry. The lamp, which
     was an ordinary standard, he examined with minute care, making
     certain measurements upon its bowl. He carefully scrutinized with his
     lens the talc shield which covered the top of the chimney and scraped
     off some ashes which adhered to its upper surface, putting some of
     them into an envelope, which he placed in his pocketbook. Finally,
     just as the doctor and the official police put in an appearance, he
     beckoned to the vicar and we all three went out upon the lawn.


     "I am glad to say that my investigation has not been entirely
     barren," he remarked. "I cannot remain to discuss the matter with the
     police, but I should be exceedingly obliged, Mr. Roundhay, if you
     would give the inspector my compliments and direct his attention to
     the bedroom window and to the sitting-room lamp. Each is suggestive,
     and together they are almost conclusive. If the police would desire
     further information I shall be happy to see any of them at the
     cottage. And now, Watson, I think that, perhaps, we shall be better
     employed elsewhere."


     It may be that the police resented the intrusion of an amateur, or
     that they imagined themselves to be upon some hopeful line of
     investigation; but it is certain that we heard nothing from them for
     the next two days. During this time Holmes spent some of his time
     smoking and dreaming in the cottage; but a greater portion in country
     walks which he undertook alone, returning after many hours without
     remark as to where he had been. One experiment served to show me the
     line of his investigation. He had bought a lamp which was the
     duplicate of the one which had burned in the room of Mortimer
     Tregennis on the morning of the tragedy. This he filled with the same
     oil as that used at the vicarage, and he carefully timed the period
     which it would take to be exhausted. Another experiment which he made
     was of a more unpleasant nature, and one which I am not likely ever
     to forget.


     "You will remember, Watson," he remarked one afternoon, "that there
     is a single common point of resemblance in the varying reports which
     have reached us. This concerns the effect of the atmosphere of the
     room in each case upon those who had first entered it. You will
     recollect that Mortimer Tregennis, in describing the episode of his
     last visit to his brother's house, remarked that the doctor on
     entering the room fell into a chair? You had forgotten? Well I can
     answer for it that it was so. Now, you will remember also that Mrs.
     Porter, the housekeeper, told us that she herself fainted upon
     entering the room and had afterwards opened the window. In the second
     case--that of Mortimer Tregennis himself--you cannot have forgotten
     the horrible stuffiness of the room when we arrived, though the
     servant had thrown open the window. That servant, I found upon
     inquiry, was so ill that she had gone to her bed. You will admit,
     Watson, that these facts are very suggestive. In each case there is
     evidence of a poisonous atmosphere. In each case, also, there is
     combustion going on in the room--in the one case a fire, in the other
     a lamp. The fire was needed, but the lamp was lit--as a comparison of
     the oil consumed will show--long after it was broad daylight. Why?
     Surely because there is some connection between three things--the
     burning, the stuffy atmosphere, and, finally, the madness or death of
     those unfortunate people. That is clear, is it not?"


     "It would appear so."


     "At least we may accept it as a working hypothesis. We will suppose,
     then, that something was burned in each case which produced an
     atmosphere causing strange toxic effects. Very good. In the first
     instance--that of the Tregennis family--this substance was placed in
     the fire. Now the window was shut, but the fire would naturally carry
     fumes to some extent up the chimney. Hence one would expect the
     effects of the poison to be less than in the second case, where there
     was less escape for the vapour. The result seems to indicate that it
     was so, since in the first case only the woman, who had presumably
     the more sensitive organism, was killed, the others exhibiting that
     temporary or permanent lunacy which is evidently the first effect of
     the drug. In the second case the result was complete. The facts,
     therefore, seem to bear out the theory of a poison which worked by
     combustion.


     "With this train of reasoning in my head I naturally looked about in
     Mortimer Tregennis's room to find some remains of this substance. The
     obvious place to look was the talc shelf or smoke-guard of the lamp.
     There, sure enough, I perceived a number of flaky ashes, and round
     the edges a fringe of brownish powder, which had not yet been
     consumed. Half of this I took, as you saw, and I placed it in an
     envelope."


     "Why half, Holmes?"


     "It is not for me, my dear Watson, to stand in the way of the
     official police force. I leave them all the evidence which I found.
     The poison still remained upon the talc had they the wit to find it.
     Now, Watson, we will light our lamp; we will, however, take the
     precaution to open our window to avoid the premature decease of two
     deserving members of society, and you will seat yourself near that
     open window in an armchair unless, like a sensible man, you determine
     to have nothing to do with the affair. Oh, you will see it out, will
     you? I thought I knew my Watson. This chair I will place opposite
     yours, so that we may be the same distance from the poison and face
     to face. The door we will leave ajar. Each is now in a position to
     watch the other and to bring the experiment to an end should the
     symptoms seem alarming. Is that all clear? Well, then, I take our
     powder--or what remains of it--from the envelope, and I lay it above
     the burning lamp. So! Now, Watson, let us sit down and await
     developments."


     They were not long in coming. I had hardly settled in my chair before
     I was conscious of a thick, musky odour, subtle and nauseous. At the
     very first whiff of it my brain and my imagination were beyond all
     control. A thick, black cloud swirled before my eyes, and my mind
     told me that in this cloud, unseen as yet, but about to spring out
     upon my appalled senses, lurked all that was vaguely horrible, all
     that was monstrous and inconceivably wicked in the universe. Vague
     shapes swirled and swam amid the dark cloud-bank, each a menace and a
     warning of something coming, the advent of some unspeakable dweller
     upon the threshold, whose very shadow would blast my soul. A freezing
     horror took possession of me. I felt that my hair was rising, that my
     eyes were protruding, that my mouth was opened, and my tongue like
     leather. The turmoil within my brain was such that something must
     surely snap. I tried to scream and was vaguely aware of some hoarse
     croak which was my own voice, but distant and detached from myself.
     At the same moment, in some effort of escape, I broke through that
     cloud of despair and had a glimpse of Holmes's face, white, rigid,
     and drawn with horror--the very look which I had seen upon the
     features of the dead. It was that vision which gave me an instant of
     sanity and of strength. I dashed from my chair, threw my arms round
     Holmes, and together we lurched through the door, and an instant
     afterwards had thrown ourselves down upon the grass plot and were
     lying side by side, conscious only of the glorious sunshine which was
     bursting its way through the hellish cloud of terror which had girt
     us in. Slowly it rose from our souls like the mists from a landscape
     until peace and reason had returned, and we were sitting upon the
     grass, wiping our clammy foreheads, and looking with apprehension at
     each other to mark the last traces of that terrific experience which
     we had undergone.


     "Upon my word, Watson!" said Holmes at last with an unsteady voice,
     "I owe you both my thanks and an apology. It was an unjustifiable
     experiment even for one's self, and doubly so for a friend. I am
     really very sorry."


     "You know," I answered with some emotion, for I have never seen so
     much of Holmes's heart before, "that it is my greatest joy and
     privilege to help you."


     He relapsed at once into the half-humorous, half-cynical vein which
     was his habitual attitude to those about him. "It would be
     superfluous to drive us mad, my dear Watson," said he. "A candid
     observer would certainly declare that we were so already before we
     embarked upon so wild an experiment. I confess that I never imagined
     that the effect could be so sudden and so severe." He dashed into the
     cottage, and, reappearing with the burning lamp held at full arm's
     length, he threw it among a bank of brambles. "We must give the room
     a little time to clear. I take it, Watson, that you have no longer a
     shadow of a doubt as to how these tragedies were produced?"


     "None whatever."


     "But the cause remains as obscure as before. Come into the arbour
     here and let us discuss it together. That villainous stuff seems
     still to linger round my throat. I think we must admit that all the
     evidence points to this man, Mortimer Tregennis, having been the
     criminal in the first tragedy, though he was the victim in the second
     one. We must remember, in the first place, that there is some story
     of a family quarrel, followed by a reconciliation. How bitter that
     quarrel may have been, or how hollow the reconciliation we cannot
     tell. When I think of Mortimer Tregennis, with the foxy face and the
     small shrewd, beady eyes behind the spectacles, he is not a man whom
     I should judge to be of a particularly forgiving disposition. Well,
     in the next place, you will remember that this idea of someone moving
     in the garden, which took our attention for a moment from the real
     cause of the tragedy, emanated from him. He had a motive in
     misleading us. Finally, if he did not throw the substance into the
     fire at the moment of leaving the room, who did do so? The affair
     happened immediately after his departure. Had anyone else come in,
     the family would certainly have risen from the table. Besides, in
     peaceful Cornwall, visitors did not arrive after ten o'clock at
     night. We may take it, then, that all the evidence points to Mortimer
     Tregennis as the culprit."


     "Then his own death was suicide!"


     "Well, Watson, it is on the face of it a not impossible supposition.
     The man who had the guilt upon his soul of having brought such a fate
     upon his own family might well be driven by remorse to inflict it
     upon himself. There are, however, some cogent reasons against it.
     Fortunately, there is one man in England who knows all about it, and
     I have made arrangements by which we shall hear the facts this
     afternoon from his own lips. Ah! he is a little before his time.
     Perhaps you would kindly step this way, Dr. Leon Sterndale. We have
     been conducing a chemical experiment indoors which has left our
     little room hardly fit for the reception of so distinguished a
     visitor."


     I had heard the click of the garden gate, and now the majestic figure
     of the great African explorer appeared upon the path. He turned in
     some surprise towards the rustic arbour in which we sat.


     "You sent for me, Mr. Holmes. I had your note about an hour ago, and
     I have come, though I really do not know why I should obey your
     summons."


     "Perhaps we can clear the point up before we separate," said Holmes.
     "Meanwhile, I am much obliged to you for your courteous acquiescence.
     You will excuse this informal reception in the open air, but my
     friend Watson and I have nearly furnished an additional chapter to
     what the papers call the Cornish Horror, and we prefer a clear
     atmosphere for the present. Perhaps, since the matters which we have
     to discuss will affect you personally in a very intimate fashion, it
     is as well that we should talk where there can be no eavesdropping."


     The explorer took his cigar from his lips and gazed sternly at my
     companion.


     "I am at a loss to know, sir," he said, "what you can have to speak
     about which affects me personally in a very intimate fashion."


     "The killing of Mortimer Tregennis," said Holmes.


     For a moment I wished that I were armed. Sterndale's fierce face
     turned to a dusky red, his eyes glared, and the knotted, passionate
     veins started out in his forehead, while he sprang forward with
     clenched hands towards my companion. Then he stopped, and with a
     violent effort he resumed a cold, rigid calmness, which was, perhaps,
     more suggestive of danger than his hot-headed outburst.


     "I have lived so long among savages and beyond the law," said he,
     "that I have got into the way of being a law to myself. You would do
     well, Mr. Holmes, not to forget it, for I have no desire to do you an
     injury."


     "Nor have I any desire to do you an injury, Dr. Sterndale. Surely the
     clearest proof of it is that, knowing what I know, I have sent for
     you and not for the police."


     Sterndale sat down with a gasp, overawed for, perhaps, the first time
     in his adventurous life. There was a calm assurance of power in
     Holmes's manner which could not be withstood. Our visitor stammered
     for a moment, his great hands opening and shutting in his agitation.


     "What do you mean?" he asked at last. "If this is bluff upon your
     part, Mr. Holmes, you have chosen a bad man for your experiment. Let
     us have no more beating about the bush. What do you mean?"


     "I will tell you," said Holmes, "and the reason why I tell you is
     that I hope frankness may beget frankness. What my next step may be
     will depend entirely upon the nature of your own defence."


     "My defence?"


     "Yes, sir."


     "My defence against what?"


     "Against the charge of killing Mortimer Tregennis."


     Sterndale mopped his forehead with his handkerchief. "Upon my word,
     you are getting on," said he. "Do all your successes depend upon this
     prodigious power of bluff?"


     "The bluff," said Holmes sternly, "is upon your side, Dr. Leon
     Sterndale, and not upon mine. As a proof I will tell you some of the
     facts upon which my conclusions are based. Of your return from
     Plymouth, allowing much of your property to go on to Africa, I will
     say nothing save that it first informed me that you were one of the
     factors which had to be taken into account in reconstructing this
     drama--"


     "I came back--"


     "I have heard your reasons and regard them as unconvincing and
     inadequate. We will pass that. You came down here to ask me whom I
     suspected. I refused to answer you. You then went to the vicarage,
     waited outside it for some time, and finally returned to your
     cottage."


     "How do you know that?"


     "I followed you."


     "I saw no one."


     "That is what you may expect to see when I follow you. You spent a
     restless night at your cottage, and you formed certain plans, which
     in the early morning you proceeded to put into execution. Leaving
     your door just as day was breaking, you filled your pocket with some
     reddish gravel that was lying heaped beside your gate."


     Sterndale gave a violent start and looked at Holmes in amazement.


     "You then walked swiftly for the mile which separated you from the
     vicarage. You were wearing, I may remark, the same pair of ribbed
     tennis shoes which are at the present moment upon your feet. At the
     vicarage you passed through the orchard and the side hedge, coming
     out under the window of the lodger Tregennis. It was now daylight,
     but the household was not yet stirring. You drew some of the gravel
     from your pocket, and you threw it up at the window above you."


     Sterndale sprang to his feet.


     "I believe that you are the devil himself!" he cried.


     Holmes smiled at the compliment. "It took two, or possibly three,
     handfuls before the lodger came to the window. You beckoned him to
     come down. He dressed hurriedly and descended to his sitting-room.
     You entered by the window. There was an interview--a short
     one--during which you walked up and down the room. Then you passed
     out and closed the window, standing on the lawn outside smoking a
     cigar and watching what occurred. Finally, after the death of
     Tregennis, you withdrew as you had come. Now, Dr. Sterndale, how do
     you justify such conduct, and what were the motives for your actions?
     If you prevaricate or trifle with me, I give you my assurance that
     the matter will pass out of my hands forever."


     Our visitor's face had turned ashen gray as he listened to the words
     of his accuser. Now he sat for some time in thought with his face
     sunk in his hands. Then with a sudden impulsive gesture he plucked a
     photograph from his breast-pocket and threw it on the rustic table
     before us.


     "That is why I have done it," said he.


     It showed the bust and face of a very beautiful woman. Holmes stooped
     over it.


     "Brenda Tregennis," said he.


     "Yes, Brenda Tregennis," repeated our visitor. "For years I have
     loved her. For years she has loved me. There is the secret of that
     Cornish seclusion which people have marvelled at. It has brought me
     close to the one thing on earth that was dear to me. I could not
     marry her, for I have a wife who has left me for years and yet whom,
     by the deplorable laws of England, I could not divorce. For years
     Brenda waited. For years I waited. And this is what we have waited
     for." A terrible sob shook his great frame, and he clutched his
     throat under his brindled beard. Then with an effort he mastered
     himself and spoke on:


     "The vicar knew. He was in our confidence. He would tell you that she
     was an angel upon earth. That was why he telegraphed to me and I
     returned. What was my baggage or Africa to me when I learned that
     such a fate had come upon my darling? There you have the missing clue
     to my action, Mr. Holmes."


     "Proceed," said my friend.


     Dr. Sterndale drew from his pocket a paper packet and laid it upon
     the table. On the outside was written "Radix pedis diaboli" with a
     red poison label beneath it. He pushed it towards me. "I understand
     that you are a doctor, sir. Have you ever heard of this preparation?"


     "Devil's-foot root! No, I have never heard of it."


     "It is no reflection upon your professional knowledge," said he, "for
     I believe that, save for one sample in a laboratory at Buda, there is
     no other specimen in Europe. It has not yet found its way either into
     the pharmacopoeia or into the literature of toxicology. The root is
     shaped like a foot, half human, half goatlike; hence the fanciful
     name given by a botanical missionary. It is used as an ordeal poison
     by the medicine-men in certain districts of West Africa and is kept
     as a secret among them. This particular specimen I obtained under
     very extraordinary circumstances in the Ubangi country." He opened
     the paper as he spoke and disclosed a heap of reddish-brown,
     snuff-like powder.


     "Well, sir?" asked Holmes sternly.


     "I am about to tell you, Mr. Holmes, all that actually occurred, for
     you already know so much that it is clearly to my interest that you
     should know all. I have already explained the relationship in which I
     stood to the Tregennis family. For the sake of the sister I was
     friendly with the brothers. There was a family quarrel about money
     which estranged this man Mortimer, but it was supposed to be made up,
     and I afterwards met him as I did the others. He was a sly, subtle,
     scheming man, and several things arose which gave me a suspicion of
     him, but I had no cause for any positive quarrel.


     "One day, only a couple of weeks ago, he came down to my cottage and
     I showed him some of my African curiosities. Among other things I
     exhibited this powder, and I told him of its strange properties, how
     it stimulates those brain centres which control the emotion of fear,
     and how either madness or death is the fate of the unhappy native who
     is subjected to the ordeal by the priest of his tribe. I told him
     also how powerless European science would be to detect it. How he
     took it I cannot say, for I never left the room, but there is no
     doubt that it was then, while I was opening cabinets and stooping to
     boxes, that he managed to abstract some of the devil's-foot root. I
     well remember how he plied me with questions as to the amount and the
     time that was needed for its effect, but I little dreamed that he
     could have a personal reason for asking.


     "I thought no more of the matter until the vicar's telegram reached
     me at Plymouth. This villain had thought that I would be at sea
     before the news could reach me, and that I should be lost for years
     in Africa. But I returned at once. Of course, I could not listen to
     the details without feeling assured that my poison had been used. I
     came round to see you on the chance that some other explanation had
     suggested itself to you. But there could be none. I was convinced
     that Mortimer Tregennis was the murderer; that for the sake of money,
     and with the idea, perhaps, that if the other members of his family
     were all insane he would be the sole guardian of their joint
     property, he had used the devil's-foot powder upon them, driven two
     of them out of their senses, and killed his sister Brenda, the one
     human being whom I have ever loved or who has ever loved me. There
     was his crime; what was to be his punishment?


     "Should I appeal to the law? Where were my proofs? I knew that the
     facts were true, but could I help to make a jury of countrymen
     believe so fantastic a story? I might or I might not. But I could not
     afford to fail. My soul cried out for revenge. I have said to you
     once before, Mr. Holmes, that I have spent much of my life outside
     the law, and that I have come at last to be a law to myself. So it
     was even now. I determined that the fate which he had given to others
     should be shared by himself. Either that or I would do justice upon
     him with my own hand. In all England there can be no man who sets
     less value upon his own life than I do at the present moment.


     "Now I have told you all. You have yourself supplied the rest. I did,
     as you say, after a restless night, set off early from my cottage. I
     foresaw the difficulty of arousing him, so I gathered some gravel
     from the pile which you have mentioned, and I used it to throw up to
     his window. He came down and admitted me through the window of the
     sitting-room. I laid his offence before him. I told him that I had
     come both as judge and executioner. The wretch sank into a chair,
     paralyzed at the sight of my revolver. I lit the lamp, put the powder
     above it, and stood outside the window, ready to carry out my threat
     to shoot him should he try to leave the room. In five minutes he
     died. My God! how he died! But my heart was flint, for he endured
     nothing which my innocent darling had not felt before him. There is
     my story, Mr. Holmes. Perhaps, if you loved a woman, you would have
     done as much yourself. At any rate, I am in your hands. You can take
     what steps you like. As I have already said, there is no man living
     who can fear death less than I do."


     Holmes sat for some little time in silence.


     "What were your plans?" he asked at last.


     "I had intended to bury myself in central Africa. My work there is
     but half finished."


     "Go and do the other half," said Holmes. "I, at least, am not
     prepared to prevent you."


     Dr. Sterndale raised his giant figure, bowed gravely, and walked from
     the arbour. Holmes lit his pipe and handed me his pouch.


     "Some fumes which are not poisonous would be a welcome change," said
     he. "I think you must agree, Watson, that it is not a case in which
     we are called upon to interfere. Our investigation has been
     independent, and our action shall be so also. You would not denounce
     the man?"


     "Certainly not," I answered.


     "I have never loved, Watson, but if I did and if the woman I loved
     had met such an end, I might act even as our lawless lion-hunter has
     done. Who knows? Well, Watson, I will not offend your intelligence by
     explaining what is obvious. The gravel upon the window-sill was, of
     course, the starting-point of my research. It was unlike anything in
     the vicarage garden. Only when my attention had been drawn to Dr.
     Sterndale and his cottage did I find its counterpart. The lamp
     shining in broad daylight and the remains of powder upon the shield
     were successive links in a fairly obvious chain. And now, my dear
     Watson, I think we may dismiss the matter from our mind and go back
     with a clear conscience to the study of those Chaldean roots which
     are surely to be traced in the Cornish branch of the great Celtic
     speech."


















     ----------
     This text is provided to you "as-is" without any warranty. No
     warranties of any kind, expressed or implied, are made to you as to
     the text or any medium it may be on, including but not limited to
     warranties of merchantablity or fitness for a particular purpose.


     This text was formatted from various free ASCII and HTML variants.
     See http://sherlock-holm.es for an electronic form of this text and
     additional information about it.


     This text comes from the collection's version 3.1.






















                              THE ADVENTURE OF THE
                                          
                                BRUCE-PARTINGTON PLANS


                               Arthur Conan Doyle






     In the third week of November, in the year 1895, a dense yellow fog
     settled down upon London. From the Monday to the Thursday I doubt
     whether it was ever possible from our windows in Baker Street to see
     the loom of the opposite houses. The first day Holmes had spent in
     cross-indexing his huge book of references. The second and third had
     been patiently occupied upon a subject which he hand recently made
     his hobby--the music of the Middle Ages. But when, for the fourth
     time, after pushing back our chairs from breakfast we saw the greasy,
     heavy brown swirl still drifting past us and condensing in oily drops
     upon the window-panes, my comrade's impatient and active nature could
     endure this drab existence no longer. He paced restlessly about our
     sitting-room in a fever of suppressed energy, biting his nails,
     tapping the furniture, and chafing against inaction.


     "Nothing of interest in the paper, Watson?" he said.


     In was aware that by anything of interest, Holmes meant anything of
     criminal interest. There was the news of a revolution, of a possible
     war, and of an impending change of government; but these did not come
     within the horizon of my companion. I could see nothing recorded in
     the shape of crime which was not commonplace and futile. Holmes
     groaned and resumed hs restless meanderings.


     "The London criminal is certainly a dull fellow," said he in the
     querulous voice of the sportsman whose game has failed him. "Look out
     this window, Watson. See how the figures loom up, are dimly seen, and
     then blend once more into the cloud-bank. The thief or the murderer
     could roam London on such a day as the tiger does the jungle, unseen
     until he pounces, and then evident only to his victim."


     "There have," said I, "been numerous petty thefts."


     Holmes snorted his contempt.


     "This great and sombre stage is set for something more worthy than
     that," said he. "It is fortunate for this community that I am not a
     criminal."


     "It is, indeed!" said I heartily.


     "Suppose that I were Brooks or Woodhouse, or any of the fifty men who
     have good reason for taking my life, how long could I survive against
     my own pursuit? A summons, a bogus appointment, and all would be
     over. It is well they don't have days of fog in the Latin
     countries--the countries of assassination. By Jove! here comes
     something at last to break our dead monotony."


     It was the maid with a telegram. Holmes tore it open and burst out
     laughing.


     "Well, well! What next?" said he. "Brother Mycroft is coming round."


     "Why not?" I asked.


     "Why not? It is as if you met a tram-car coming down a country lane.
     Mycroft has his rails and he runs on them. His Pall Mall lodgings,
     the Diogenes Club, Whitehall--that is his cycle. Once, and only once,
     he has been here. What upheaval can possibly have derailed him?"


     "Does he not explain?"


     Holmes handed me his brother's telegram.


     Must see you over Cadogen West. Coming at once.
     Mycroft.


     "Cadogen West? I have heard the name."


     "It recalls nothing to my mind. But that Mycroft should break out in
     this erratic fashion! A planet might as well leave its orbit. By the
     way, do you know what Mycroft is?"


     I had some vague recollection of an explanation at the time of the
     Adventure of the Greek Interpreter.


     "You told me that he had some small office under the British
     government."


     Holmes chuckled.


     "I did not know you quite so well in those days. One has to be
     discreet when one talks of high matters of state. You are right in
     thinking that he under the British government. You would also be
     right in a sense if you said that occasionally he is the British
     government."


     "My dear Holmes!"


     "I thought I might surprise you. Mycroft draws four hundred and fifty
     pounds a year, remains a subordinate, has no ambitions of any kind,
     will receive neither honour nor title, but remains the most
     indispensable man in the country."


     "But how?"


     "Well, his position is unique. He has made it for himself. There has
     never been anything like it before, nor will be again. He has the
     tidiest and most orderly brain, with the greatest capacity for
     storing facts, of any man living. The same great powers which I have
     turned to the detection of crime he has used for this particular
     business. The conclusions of every department are passed to him, and
     he is the central exchange, the clearinghouse, which makes out the
     balance. All other men are specialists, but his specialism is
     omniscience. We will suppose that a minister needs information as to
     a point which involves the Navy, India, Canada and the bimetallic
     question; he could get his separate advices from various departments
     upon each, but only Mycroft can focus them all, and say offhand how
     each factor would affect the other. They began by using him as a
     short-cut, a convenience; now he has made himself an essential. In
     that great brain of his everything is pigeon-holed and can be handed
     out in an instant. Again and again his word has decided the national
     policy. He lives in it. He thinks of nothing else save when, as an
     intellectual exercise, he unbends if I call upon him and ask him to
     advise me on one of my little problems. But Jupiter is descending
     to-day. What on earth can it mean? Who is Cadogan West, and what is
     he to Mycroft?"


     "I have it," I cried, and plunged among the litter of papers upon the
     sofa. "Yes, yes, here he is, sure enough! Cadogen West was the young
     man who was found dead on the Underground on Tuesday morning."


     Holmes sat up at attention, his pipe halfway to his lips.


     "This must be serious, Watson. A death which has caused my brother to
     alter his habits can be no ordinary one. What in the world can he
     have to do with it? The case was featureless as I remember it. The
     young man had apparently fallen out of the train and killed himself.
     He had not been robbed, and there was no particular reason to suspect
     violence. Is that not so?"


     "There has been an inquest," said I, "and a good many fresh facts
     have come out. Looked at more closely, I should certainly say that it
     was a curious case."


     "Judging by its effect upon my brother, I should think it must be a
     most extraordinary one." He snuggled down in his armchair. "Now,
     Watson, let us have the facts."


     "The man's name was Arthur Cadogan West. He was twenty-seven years of
     age, unmarried, and a clerk at Woolwich Arsenal."


     "Government employ. Behold the link with Brother Mycroft!"


     "He left Woolwich suddenly on Monday night. Was last seen by his
     fiancee, Miss Violet Westbury, whom he left abruptly in the fog about
     7.30 that evening. There was no quarrel between them and she can give
     no motive for his action. The next thing heard of him was when his
     dead body was discovered by a plate-layer named Mason, just outside
     Aldgate Station on the Underground system in London."


     "When?"


     "The body was found at six on Tuesday morning. It was lying wide of
     the metals upon the left hand of the track as one goes eastward, at a
     point close to the station, where the line emerges from the tunnel in
     which it runs. The head was badly crushed--an injury which might well
     have been caused by a fall from the train. The body could only have
     come on the line in that way. Had it been carried down from any
     neighbouring street, it must have passed the station barriers, where
     a collector is always standing. This point seems absolutely certain."


     "Very good. The case is definite enough. The man, dead or alive,
     either fell or was precipitated from a train. So much is clear to me.
     Continue."


     "The trains which traverse the lines of rail beside which the body
     was found are those which run from west to east, some being purely
     Metropolitan, and some from Willesden and outlying junctions. It can
     be stated for certain that this young man, when he met his death, was
     travelling in this direction at some late hour of the night, but at
     what point he entered the train it is impossible to state."


     "His ticket, of course, would show that."


     "There was no ticket in his pockets."


     "No ticket! Dear me, Watson, this is really very singular. According
     to my experience it is not possible to reach the platform of a
     Metropolitan train without exhibiting one's ticket. Presumably, then,
     the young man had one. Was it taken from him in order to conceal the
     station from which he came? It is possible. Or did he drop it in the
     carriage? That is also possible. But the point is of curious
     interest. I understand that there was no sign of robbery?"


     "Apparently not. There is a list here of his possessions. His purse
     contained two pounds fifteen. He had also a check-book on the
     Woolwich branch of the Capital and Counties Bank. Through this his
     identity was established. There were also two dress-circle tickets
     for the Woolwich Theatre, dated for that very evening. Also a small
     packet of technical papers."


     Holmes gave an exclamation of satisfaction.


     "There we have it at last, Watson! British government--Woolwich.
     Arsenal--technical papers--Brother Mycroft, the chain is complete.
     But here he comes, if I am not mistaken, to speak for himself."


     A moment later the tall and portly form of Mycroft Holmes was ushered
     into the room. Heavily built and massive, there was a suggestion of
     uncouth physical inertia in the figure, but above this unwieldy frame
     there was perched a head so masterful in its brow, so alert in its
     steel-gray, deep-set eyes, so firm in its lips, and so subtle in its
     play of expression, that after the first glance one forgot the gross
     body and remembered only the dominant mind.


     At his heels came our old friend Lestrade, of Scotland Yard--thin and
     austere. The gravity of both their faces foretold some weighty quest.
     The detective shook hands without a word. Mycroft Holmes struggled
     out of his overcoat and subsided into an armchair.


     "A most annoying business, Sherlock," said he. "I extremely dislike
     altering my habits, but the powers that be would take no denial. In
     the present state of Siam it is most awkward that I should be away
     from the office. But it is a real crisis. I have never seen the Prime
     Minister so upset. As to the Admiralty--it is buzzing like an
     overturned bee-hive. Have you read up the case?"


     "We have just done so. What were the technical papers?"


     "Ah, there's the point! Fortunately, it has not come out. The press
     would be furious if it did. The papers which this wretched youth had
     in his pocket were the plans of the Bruce-Partington submarine."


     Mycroft Holmes spoke with a solemnity which showed his sense of the
     importance of the subject. His brother and I sat expectant.


     "Surely you have heard of it? I thought everyone had heard of it."


     "Only as a name."


     "Its importance can hardly be exaggerated. It has been the most
     jealously guarded of all government secrets. You may take it from me
     that naval warfare becomes impossible within the radius of a
     Bruce-Partington's operation. Two years ago a very large sum was
     smuggled through the Estimates and was expended in acquiring a
     monopoly of the invention. Every effort has been made to keep the
     secret. The plans, which are exceedingly intricate, comprising some
     thirty separate patents, each essential to the working of the whole,
     are kept in an elaborate safe in a confidential office adjoining the
     arsenal, with burglar-proof doors and windows. Under no conceivable
     circumstances were the plans to be taken from the office. If the
     chief constructor of the Navy desired to consult them, even he was
     forced to go to the Woolwich office for the purpose. And yet here we
     find them in the pocket of a dead junior clerk in the heart of
     London. From an official point of view it's simply awful."


     "But you have recovered them?"


     "No, Sherlock, no! That's the pinch. We have not. Ten papers were
     taken from Woolwich. There were seven in the pocket of Cadogan West.
     The three most essential are gone--stolen, vanished. You must drop
     everything, Sherlock. Never mind your usual petty puzzles of the
     police-court. It's a vital international problem that you have to
     solve. Why did Cadogan West take the papers, where are the missing
     ones, how did he die, how came his body where it was found, how can
     the evil be set right? Find an answer to all these questions, and you
     will have done good service for your country."


     "Why do you not solve it yourself, Mycroft? You can see as far as I."


     "Possibly, Sherlock. But it is a question of getting details. Give me
     your details, and from an armchair I will return you an excellent
     expert opinion. But to run here and run there, to cross-question
     railway guards, and lie on my face with a lens to my eye--it is not
     my mÃ©tier. No, you are the one man who can clear the matter up. If
     you have a fancy to see your name in the next honours list--"


     My friend smiled and shook his head.


     "I play the game for the game's own sake," said he. "But the problem
     certainly presents some points of interest, and I shall be very
     pleased to look into it. Some more facts, please."


     "I have jotted down the more essential ones upon this sheet of paper,
     together with a few addresses which you will find of service. The
     actual official guardian of the papers is the famous government
     expert, Sir James Walter, whose decorations and sub-titles fill two
     lines of a book of reference. He has grown gray in the service, is a
     gentleman, a favoured guest in the most exalted houses, and, above
     all, a man whose patriotism is beyond suspicion. He is one of two who
     have a key of the safe. I may add that the papers were undoubtedly in
     the office during working hours on Monday, and that Sir James left
     for London about three o'clock taking his key with him. He was at the
     house of Admiral Sinclair at Barclay Square during the whole of the
     evening when this incident occurred."


     "Has the fact been verified?"


     "Yes; his brother, Colonel Valentine Walter, has testified to his
     departure from Woolwich, and Admiral Sinclair to his arrival in
     London; so Sir James is no longer a direct factor in the problem."


     "Who was the other man with a key?"


     "The senior clerk and draughtsman, Mr. Sidney Johnson. He is a man of
     forty, married, with five children. He is a silent, morose man, but
     he has, on the whole, an excellent record in the public service. He
     is unpopular with his colleagues, but a hard worker. According to his
     own account, corroborated only by the word of his wife, he was at
     home the whole of Monday evening after office hours, and his key has
     never left the watch-chain upon which it hangs."


     "Tell us about Cadogan West."


     "He has been ten years in the service and has done good work. He has
     the reputation of being hot-headed and imperious, but a straight,
     honest man. We have nothing against him. He was next Sidney Johnson
     in the office. His duties brought him into daily, personal contact
     with the plans. No one else had the handling of them."


     "Who locked up the plans that night?"


     "Mr. Sidney Johnson, the senior clerk."


     "Well, it is surely perfectly clear who took them away. They are
     actually found upon the person of this junior clerk, Cadogan West.
     That seems final, does it not?"


     "It does, Sherlock, and yet it leaves so much unexplained. In the
     first place, why did he take them?"


     "I presume they were of value?"


     "He could have got several thousands for them very easily."


     "Can you suggest any possible motive for taking the papers to London
     except to sell them?"


     "No, I cannot."


     "Then we must take that as our working hypothesis. Young West took
     the papers. Now this could only be done by having a false key--"


     "Several false keys. He had to open the building and the room."


     "He had, then, several false keys. He took the papers to London to
     sell the secret, intending, no doubt, to have the plans themselves
     back in the safe next morning before they were missed. While in
     London on this treasonable mission he met his end."


     "How?"


     "We will suppose that he was travelling back to Woolwich when he was
     killed and thrown out of the compartment."


     "Aldgate, where the body was found, is considerably past the station
     London Bridge, which would be his route to Woolwich."


     "Many circumstances could be imagined under which he would pass
     London Bridge. There was someone in the carriage, for example, with
     whom he was having an absorbing interview. This interview led to a
     violent scene in which he lost his life. Possibly he tried to leave
     the carriage, fell out on the line, and so met his end. The other
     closed the door. There was a thick fog, and nothing could be seen."


     "No better explanation can be given with our present knowledge; and
     yet consider, Sherlock, how much you leave untouched. We will
     suppose, for argument's sake, that young Cadogan West had determined
     to convey these papers to London. He would naturally have made an
     appointment with the foreign agent and kept his evening clear.
     Instead of that he took two tickets for the theatre, escorted his
     fiancee halfway there, and then suddenly disappeared."


     "A blind," said Lestrade, who had sat listening with some impatience
     to the conversation.


     "A very singular one. That is objection No. 1. Objection No. 2: We
     will suppose that he reaches London and sees the foreign agent. He
     must bring back the papers before morning or the loss will be
     discovered. He took away ten. Only seven were in his pocket. What had
     become of the other three? He certainly would not leave them of his
     own free will. Then, again, where is the price of his treason? Once
     would have expected to find a large sum of money in his pocket."


     "It seems to me perfectly clear," said Lestrade. "I have no doubt at
     all as to what occurred. He took the papers to sell them. He saw the
     agent. They could not agree as to price. He started home again, but
     the agent went with him. In the train the agent murdered him, took
     the more essential papers, and threw his body from the carriage. That
     would account for everything, would it not?"


     "Why had he no ticket?"


     "The ticket would have shown which station was nearest the agent's
     house. Therefore he took it from the murdered man's pocket."


     "Good, Lestrade, very good," said Holmes. "Your theory holds
     together. But if this is true, then the case is at an end. On the one
     hand, the traitor is dead. On the other, the plans of the
     Bruce-Partington submarine are presumably already on the Continent.
     What is there for us to do?"


     "To act, Sherlock--to act!" cried Mycroft, springing to his feet.
     "All my instincts are against this explanation. Use your powers! Go
     to the scene of the crime! See the people concerned! Leave no stone
     unturned! In all your career you have never had so great a chance of
     serving your country."


     "Well, well!" said Holmes, shrugging his shoulders. "Come, Watson!
     And you, Lestrade, could you favour us with your company for an hour
     or two? We will begin our investigation by a visit to Aldgate
     Station. Good-bye, Mycroft. I shall let you have a report before
     evening, but I warn you in advance that you have little to expect."


     An hour later Holmes, Lestrade and I stood upon the Underground
     railroad at the point where it emerges from the tunnel immediately
     before Aldgate Station. A courteous red-faced old gentleman
     represented the railway company.


     "This is where the young man's body lay," said he, indicating a spot
     about three feet from the metals. "It could not have fallen from
     above, for these, as you see, are all blank walls. Therefore, it
     could only have come from a train, and that train, so far as we can
     trace it, must have passed about midnight on Monday."


     "Have the carriages been examined for any sign of violence?"


     "There are no such signs, and no ticket has been found."


     "No record of a door being found open?"


     "None."


     "We have had some fresh evidence this morning," said Lestrade. "A
     passenger who passed Aldgate in an ordinary Metropolitan train about
     11.40 on Monday night declares that he heard a heavy thud, as of a
     body striking the line, just before the train reached the station.
     There was dense fog, however, and nothing could be seen. He made no
     report of it at the time. Why, whatever is the matter with Mr.
     Holmes?"


     My friend was standing with an expression of strained intensity upon
     his face, staring at the railway metals where they curved out of the
     tunnel. Aldgate is a junction, and there was a network of points. On
     these his eager, questioning eyes were fixed, and I saw on his keen,
     alert face that tightening of the lips, that quiver of the nostrils,
     and concentration of the heavy, tufted brows which I knew so well.


     "Points," he muttered; "the points."


     "What of it? What do you mean?"


     "I suppose there are no great number of points on a system such as
     this?"


     "No; they are very few."


     "And a curve, too. Points, and a curve. By Jove! if it were only so."


     "What is it, Mr. Holmes? Have you a clue?"


     "An idea--an indication, no more. But the case certainly grows in
     interest. Unique, perfectly unique, and yet why not? I do not see any
     indications of bleeding on the line."


     "There were hardly any."


     "But I understand that there was a considerable wound."


     "The bone was crushed, but there was no great external injury."


     "And yet one would have expected some bleeding. Would it be possible
     for me to inspect the train which contained the passenger who heard
     the thud of a fall in the fog?"


     "I fear not, Mr. Holmes. The train has been broken up before now, and
     the carriages redistributed."


     "I can assure you, Mr. Holmes," said Lestrade, "that every carriage
     has been carefully examined. I saw to it myself."


     It was one of my friend's most obvious weaknesses that he was
     impatient with less alert intelligences than his own.


     "Very likely," said he, turning away. "As it happens, it was not the
     carriages which I desired to examine. Watson, we have done all we can
     here. We need not trouble you any further, Mr. Lestrade. I think our
     investigations must now carry us to Woolwich."


     At London Bridge, Holmes wrote a telegram to his brother, which he
     handed to me before dispatching it. It ran thus:


     See some light in the darkness, but it may possibly flicker out.
     Meanwhile, please send by messenger, to await return at Baker Street,
     a complete list of all foreign spies or international agents known to
     be in England, with full address.
     Sherlock.


     "That should be helpful, Watson," he remarked as we took our seats in
     the Woolwich train.  "We certainly owe Brother Mycroft a debt for
     having introduced us to what promises to be a really very remarkable
     case."


     His eager face still wore that expression of intense and high-strung
     energy, which showed me that some novel and suggestive circumstance
     had opened up a stimulating line of thought. See the foxhound with
     hanging ears and drooping tail as it lolls about the kennels, and
     compare it with the same hound as, with gleaming eyes and straining
     muscles, it runs upon a breast-high scent--such was the change in
     Holmes since the morning. He was a different man from the limp and
     lounging figure in the mouse-coloured dressing-gown who had prowled
     so restlessly only a few hours before round the fog-girt room.


     "There is material here. There is scope," said he. "I am dull indeed
     not to have understood its possibilities."


     "Even now they are dark to me."


     "The end is dark to me also, but I have hold of one idea which may
     lead us far. The man met his death elsewhere, and his body was on the
     roof of a carriage."


     "On the roof!"


     "Remarkable, is it not? But consider the facts. Is it a coincidence
     that it is found at the very point where the train pitches and sways
     as it comes round on the points? Is not that the place where an
     object upon the roof might be expected to fall off? The points would
     affect no object inside the train. Either the body fell from the
     roof, or a very curious coincidence has occurred. But now consider
     the question of the blood. Of course, there was no bleeding on the
     line if the body had bled elsewhere. Each fact is suggestive in
     itself. Together they have a cumulative force."


     "And the ticket, too!" I cried.


     "Exactly.  We could not explain the absence of a ticket. This would
     explain it. Everything fits together."


     "But suppose it were so, we are still as far as ever from unravelling
     the mystery of his death. Indeed, it becomes not simpler but
     stranger."


     "Perhaps," said Holmes, thoughtfully, "perhaps." He relapsed into a
     silent reverie, which lasted until the slow train drew up at last in
     Woolwich Station. There he called a cab and drew Mycroft's paper from
     his pocket.


     "We have quite a little round of afternoon calls to make," said he.
     "I think that Sir James Walter claims our first attention."


     The house of the famous official was a fine villa with green lawns
     stretching down to the Thames. As we reached it the fog was lifting,
     and a thin, watery sunshine was breaking through. A butler answered
     our ring.


     "Sir James, sir!" said he with solemn face. "Sir James died this
     morning."


     "Good heavens!" cried Holmes in amazement. "How did he die?"


     "Perhaps you would care to step in, sir, and see his brother, Colonel
     Valentine?"


     "Yes, we had best do so."


     We were ushered into a dim-lit drawing-room, where an instant later
     we were joined by a very tall, handsome, light-beared man of fifty,
     the younger brother of the dead scientist. His wild eyes, stained
     cheeks, and unkempt hair all spoke of the sudden blow which had
     fallen upon the household. He was hardly articulate as he spoke of
     it.


     "It was this horrible scandal," said he. "My brother, Sir James, was
     a man of very sensitive honour, and he could not survive such an
     affair. It broke his heart. He was always so proud of the efficiency
     of his department, and this was a crushing blow."


     "We had hoped that he might have given us some indications which
     would have helped us to clear the matter up."


     "I assure you that it was all a mystery to him as it is to you and to
     all of us. He had already put all his knowledge at the disposal of
     the police. Naturally he had no doubt that Cadogan West was guilty.
     But all the rest was inconceivable."


     "You cannot throw any new light upon the affair?"


     "I know nothing myself save what I have read or heard. I have no
     desire to be discourteous, but you can understand, Mr. Holmes, that
     we are much disturbed at present, and I must ask you to hasten this
     interview to an end."


     "This is indeed an unexpected development," said my friend when we
     had regained the cab. "I wonder if the death was natural, or whether
     the poor old fellow killed himself! If the latter, may it be taken as
     some sign of self-reproach for duty neglected? We must leave that
     question to the future. Now we shall turn to the Cadogan Wests."


     A small but well-kept house in the outskirts of the town sheltered
     the bereaved mother. The old lady was too dazed with grief to be of
     any use to us, but at her side was a white-faced young lady, who
     introduced herself as Miss Violet Westbury, the fiancee of the dead
     man, and the last to see him upon that fatal night.


     "I cannot explain it, Mr. Holmes," she said. "I have not shut an eye
     since the tragedy, thinking, thinking, thinking, night and day, what
     the true meaning of it can be. Arthur was the most single-minded,
     chivalrous, patriotic man upon earth. He would have cut his right
     hand off before he would sell a State secret confided to his keeping.
     It is absurd, impossible, preposterous to anyone who knew him."


     "But the facts, Miss Westbury?"


     "Yes, yes; I admit I cannot explain them."


     "Was he in any want of money?"


     "No; his needs were very simple and his salary ample. He had saved a
     few hundreds, and we were to marry at the New Year."


     "No signs of any mental excitement? Come, Miss Westbury, be
     absolutely frank with us."


     The quick eye of my companion had noted some change in her manner.
     She coloured and hesitated.


     "Yes," she said at last, "I had a feeling that there was something on
     his mind."


     "For long?"


     "Only for the last week or so. He was thoughtful and worried. Once I
     pressed him about it. He admitted that there was something, and that
     it was concerned with his official life. 'It is too serious for me to
     speak about, even to you,' said he. I could get nothing more."


     Holmes looked grave.


     "Go on, Miss Westbury. Even if it seems to tell against him, go on.
     We cannot say what it may lead to."


     "Indeed, I have nothing more to tell. Once or twice it seemed to me
     that he was on the point of telling me something. He spoke one
     evening of the importance of the secret, and I have some recollection
     that he said that no doubt foreign spies would pay a great deal to
     have it."


     My friend's face grew graver still.


     "Anything else?"


     "He said that we were slack about such matters--that it would be easy
     for a traitor to get the plans."


     "Was it only recently that he made such remarks?"


     "Yes, quite recently."


     "Now tell us of that last evening."


     "We were to go to the theatre. The fog was so thick that a cab was
     useless. We walked, and our way took us close to the office. Suddenly
     he darted away into the fog."


     "Without a word?"


     "He gave an exclamation; that was all. I waited but he never
     returned. Then I walked home. Next morning, after the office opened,
     they came to inquire. About twelve o'clock we heard the terrible
     news. Oh, Mr. Holmes, if you could only, only save his honour! It was
     so much to him."


     Holmes shook his head sadly.


     "Come, Watson," said he, "our ways lie elsewhere. Our next station
     must be the office from which the papers were taken.


     "It was black enough before against this young man, but our inquiries
     make it blacker," he remarked as the cab lumbered off. "His coming
     marriage gives a motive for the crime. He naturally wanted money. The
     idea was in his head, since he spoke about it. He nearly made the
     girl an accomplice in the treason by telling her his plans. It is all
     very bad."


     "But surely, Holmes, character goes for something? Then, again, why
     should he leave the girl in the street and dart away to commit a
     felony?"


     "Exactly! There are certainly objections. But it is a formidable case
     which they have to meet."


     Mr. Sidney Johnson, the senior clerk, met us at the office and
     received us with that respect which my companion's card always
     commanded. He was a thin, gruff, bespectacled man of middle age, his
     cheeks haggard, and his hands twitching from the nervous strain to
     which he had been subjected.


     "It is bad, Mr. Holmes, very bad! Have you heard of the death of the
     chief?"


     "We have just come from his house."


     "The place is disorganized. The chief dead, Cadogan West dead, our
     papers stolen. And yet, when we closed our door on Monday evening, we
     were as efficient an office as any in the government service. Good
     God, it's dreadful to think of! That West, of all men, should have
     done such a thing!"


     "You are sure of his guilt, then?"


     "I can see no other way out of it. And yet I would have trusted him
     as I trust myself."


     "At what hour was the office closed on Monday?"


     "At five."


     "Did you close it?"


     "I am always the last man out."


     "Where were the plans?"


     "In that safe. I put them there myself."


     "Is there no watchman to the building?"


     "There is, but he has other departments to look after as well. He is
     an old soldier and a most trustworthy man. He saw nothing that
     evening. Of course the fog was very thick."


     "Suppose that Cadogan West wished to make his way into the building
     after hours; he would need three keys, would he not, before the could
     reach the papers?"


     "Yes, he would. The key of the outer door, the key of the office, and
     the key of the safe."


     "Only Sir James Walter and you had those keys?"


     "I had no keys of the doors--only of the safe."


     "Was Sir James a man who was orderly in his habits?"


     "Yes, I think he was. I know that so far as those three keys are
     concerned he kept them on the same ring. I have often seen them
     there."


     "And that ring went with him to London?"


     "He said so."


     "And your key never left your possession?"


     "Never."


     "Then West, if he is the culprit, must have had a duplicate. And yet
     none was found upon his body. One other point: if a clerk in this
     office desired to sell the plans, would it not be simply to copy the
     plans for himself than to take the originals, as was actually done?"


     "It would take considerable technical knowledge to copy the plans in
     an effective way."


     "But I suppose either Sir James, or you, or West has that technical
     knowledge?"


     "No doubt we had, but I beg you won't try to drag me into the matter,
     Mr. Holmes. What is the use of our speculating in this way when the
     original plans were actually found on West?"


     "Well, it is certainly singular that he should run the risk of taking
     originals if he could safely have taken copies, which would have
     equally served his turn."


     "Singular, no doubt--and yet he did so."


     "Every inquiry in this case reveals something inexplicable. Now there
     are three papers still missing. They are, as I understand, the vital
     ones."


     "Yes, that is so."


     "Do you mean to say that anyone holding these three papers, and
     without the seven others, could construct a Bruce-Partington
     submarine?"


     "I reported to that effect to the Admiralty. But to-day I have been
     over the drawings again, and I am not so sure of it. The double
     valves with the automatic self-adjusting slots are drawn in one of
     the papers which have been returned. Until the foreigners had
     invented that for themselves they could not make the boat. Of course
     they might soon get over the difficulty."


     "But the three missing drawings are the most important?"


     "Undoubtedly."


     "I think, with your permission, I will now take a stroll round the
     premises. I do not recall any other question which I desired to ask."


     He examined the lock of the safe, the door of the room, and finally
     the iron shutters of the window. It was only when we were on the lawn
     outside that his interest was strongly excited. There was a laurel
     bush outside the window, and several of the branches bore signs of
     having been twisted or snapped. He examined them carefully with his
     lens, and then some dim and vague marks upon the earth beneath.
     Finally he asked the chief clerk to close the iron shutters, and he
     pointed out to me that they hardly met in the centre, and that it
     would be possible for anyone outside to see what was going on within
     the room.


     "The indications are ruined by three days' delay. They may mean
     something or nothing. Well, Watson, I do not think that Woolwich can
     help us further. It is a small crop which we have gathered. Let us
     see if we can do better in London."


     Yet we added one more sheaf to our harvest before we left Woolwich
     Station. The clerk in the ticket office was able to say with
     confidence that he saw Cadogan West--whom he knew well by sight--upon
     the Monday night, and that he went to London by the 8.15 to London
     Bridge. He was alone and took a single third-class ticket. The clerk
     was struck at the time by his excited and nervous manner. So shaky
     was he that he could hardly pick up his change, and the clerk had
     helped him with it. A reference to the timetable showed that the 8.15
     was the first train which it was possible for West to take after he
     had left the lady about 7.30.


     "Let us reconstruct, Watson," said Holmes after half an hour of
     silence. "I am not aware that in all our joint researches we have
     ever had a case which was more difficult to get at. Every fresh
     advance which we make only reveals a fresh ridge beyond. And yet we
     have surely made some appreciable progress.


     "The effect of our inquiries at Woolwich has in the main been against
     young Cadogan West; but the indications at the window would lend
     themselves to a more favourable hypothesis. Let us suppose, for
     example, that he had been approached by some foreign agent. It might
     have been done under such pledges as would have prevented him from
     speaking of it, and yet would have affected his thoughts in the
     direction indicated by his remarks to his fiancee. Very good. We will
     now suppose that as he went to the theatre with the young lady he
     suddenly, in the fog, caught a glimpse of this same agent going in
     the direction of the office. He was an impetuous man, quick in his
     decisions. Everything gave way to his duty. He followed the man,
     reached the window, saw the abstraction of the documents, and pursued
     the thief. In this way we get over the objection that no one would
     take originals when he could make copies. This outsider had to take
     originals. So far it holds together."


     "What is the next step?"


     "Then we come into difficulties. One would imagine that under such
     circumstances the first act of young Cadogan West would be to seize
     the villain and raise the alarm. Why did he not do so? Could it have
     been an official superior who took the papers? That would explain
     West's conduct. Or could the chief have given West the slip in the
     fog, and West started at once to London to head him off from his own
     rooms, presuming that he knew where the rooms were? The call must
     have been very pressing, since he left his girl standing in the fog
     and made no effort to communicate with her. Our scent runs cold here,
     and there is a vast gap between either hypothesis and the laying of
     West's body, with seven papers in his pocket, on the roof of a
     Metropolitan train. My instinct now is to work form the other end. If
     Mycroft has given us the list of addresses we may be able to pick our
     man and follow two tracks instead of one."


     Surely enough, a note awaited us at Baker Street. A government
     messenger had brought it post-haste. Holmes glanced at it and threw
     it over to me.


     There are numerous small fry, but few who would handle so big an
     affair. The only men worth considering are Adolph Mayer, of 13 Great
     George Street, Westminster; Louis La Rothiere, of Campden Mansions,
     Notting Hill; and Hugo Oberstein, 13 Caulfield Gardens, Kensington.
     The latter was known to be in town on Monday and is now reported as
     having left. Glad to hear you have seen some light. The Cabinet
     awaits your final report with the utmost anxiety. Urgent
     representations have arrived from the very highest quarter. The whole
     force of the State is at your back if you should need it.
     Mycroft.


     "I'm afraid," said Holmes, smiling, "that all the queen's horses and
     all the queen's men cannot avail in this matter." He had spread out
     his big map of London and leaned eagerly over it. "Well, well," said
     he presently with an exclamation of satisfaction, "things are turning
     a little in our direction at last. Why, Watson, I do honestly believe
     that we are going to pull it off, after all." He slapped me on the
     shoulder with a sudden burst of hilarity. "I am going out now. It is
     only a reconnaissance. I will do nothing serious without my trusted
     comrade and biographer at my elbow. Do you stay here, and the odds
     are that you will see me again in an hour or two. If time hangs heavy
     get foolscap and a pen, and begin your narrative of how we saved the
     State."


     I felt some reflection of his elation in my own mind, for I knew well
     that he would not depart so far from his usual austerity of demeanour
     unless there was good cause for exultation. All the long November
     evening I waited, filled with impatience for his return. At last,
     shortly after nine o'clock, there arrived a messenger with a note:


     Am dining at Goldini's Restaurant, Gloucester Road, Kensington.
     Please come at once and join me there. Bring with you a jemmy, a dark
     lantern, a chisel, and a revolver.
     S.H.


     It was a nice equipment for a respectable citizen to carry through
     the dim, fog-draped streets. I stowed them all discreetly away in my
     overcoat and drove straight to the address given. There sat my friend
     at a little round table near the door of the garish Italian
     restaurant.


     "Have you had something to eat? Then join me in a coffee and curacao.
     Try one of the proprietor's cigars. They are less poisonous than one
     would expect. Have you the tools?"


     "They are here, in my overcoat."


     "Excellent. Let me give you a short sketch of what I have done, with
     some indication of what we are about to do. Now it must be evident to
     you, Watson, that this young man's body was placed on the roof of the
     train. That was clear from the instant that I determined the fact
     that it was from the roof, and not from a carriage, that he had
     fallen."


     "Could it not have been dropped from a bridge?"


     "I should say it was impossible. If you examine the roofs you will
     find that they are slightly rounded, and there is no railing round
     them. Therefore, we can say for certain that young Cadogan West was
     placed on it."


     "How could he be placed there?"


     "That was the question which we had to answer. There is only one
     possible way. You are aware that the Underground runs clear of
     tunnels at some points in the West End. I had a vague memory that as
     I have travelled by it I have occasionally seen windows just above my
     head. Now, suppose that a train halted under such a window, would
     there be any difficulty in laying a body upon the roof?"


     "It seems most improbable."


     "We must fall back upon the old axiom that when all other
     contingencies fail, whatever remains, however improbable, must be the
     truth. Here all other contingencies have failed. When I found that
     the leading international agent, who had just left London, lived in a
     row of houses which abutted upon the Underground, I was so pleased
     that you were a little astonished at my sudden frivolity."


     "Oh, that was it, was it?"


     "Yes, that was it. Mr. Hugo Oberstein, of 13 Caulfield Gardens, had
     become my objective. I began my operations at Gloucester Road
     Station, where a very helpful official walked with me along the track
     and allowed me to satisfy myself not only that the back-stair windows
     of Caulfield Gardens open on the line but the even more essential
     fact that, owing to the intersection of one of the larger railways,
     the Underground trains are frequently held motionless for some
     minutes at that very spot."


     "Splendid, Holmes! You have got it!"


     "So far--so far, Watson. We advance, but the goal is afar. Well,
     having seen the back of Caulfield Gardens, I visited the front and
     satisfied myself that the bird was indeed flown. It is a considerable
     house, unfurnished, so far as I could judge, in the upper rooms.
     Oberstein lived there with a single valet, who was probably a
     confederate entirely in his confidence. We must bear in mind that
     Oberstein has gone to the Continent to dispose of his booty, but not
     with any idea of flight; for he had no reason to fear a warrant, and
     the idea of an amateur domiciliary visit would certainly never occur
     to him. Yet that is precisely what we are about to make."


     "Could we not get a warrant and legalize it?"


     "Hardly on the evidence."


     "What can we hope to do?"


     "We cannot tell what correspondence may be there."


     "I don't like it, Holmes."


     "My dear fellow, you shall keep watch in the street. I'll do the
     criminal part. It's not a time to stick at trifles. Think of
     Mycroft's note, of the Admiralty, the Cabinet, the exalted person who
     waits for news. We are bound to go."


     My answer was to rise from the table.


     "You are right, Holmes. We are bound to go."


     He sprang up and shook me by the hand.


     "I knew you would not shrink at the last," said he, and for a moment
     I saw something in his eyes which was nearer to tenderness than I had
     ever seen. The next instant he was his masterful, practical self once
     more.


     "It is nearly half a mile, but there is no hurry. Let us walk," said
     he. "Don't drop the instruments, I beg. Your arrest as a suspicious
     character would be a most unfortunate complication."


     Caulfield Gardens was one of those lines of flat-faced pillared, and
     porticoed houses which are so prominent a product of the middle
     Victorian epoch in the West End of London. Next door there appeared
     to be a children's party, for the merry buzz of young voices and the
     clatter of a piano resounded through the night. The fog still hung
     about and screened us with its friendly shade. Holmes had lit his
     lantern and flashed it upon the massive door.


     "This is a serious proposition," said he. "It is certainly bolted as
     well as locked. We would do better in the area. There is an excellent
     archway down yonder in case a too zealous policeman should intrude.
     Give me a hand, Watson, and I'll do the same for you."


     A minute later we were both in the area. Hardly had we reached the
     dark shadows before the step of the policeman was heard in the fog
     above. As its soft rhythm died away, Holmes set to work upon the
     lower door. I saw him stoop and strain until with a sharp crash it
     flew open. We sprang through into the dark passage, closing the area
     door behind us. Holmes let the way up the curving, uncarpeted stair.
     His little fan of yellow light shone upon a low window.


     "Here we are, Watson--this must be the one." He threw it open, and as
     he did so there was a low, harsh murmur, growing steadily into a loud
     roar as a train dashed past us in the darkness. Holmes swept his
     light along the window-sill. It was thickly coated with soot from the
     passing engines, but the black surface was blurred and rubbed in
     places.


     "You can see where they rested the body. Halloa, Watson! what is
     this? There can be no doubt that it is a blood mark." He was pointing
     to faint discolourations along the woodwork of the window. "Here it
     is on the stone of the stair also. The demonstration is complete. Let
     us stay here until a train stops."


     We had not long to wait. The very next train roared from the tunnel
     as before, but slowed in the open, and then, with a creaking of
     brakes, pulled up immediately beneath us. It was not four feet from
     the window-ledge to the roof of the carriages. Holmes softly closed
     the window.


     "So far we are justified," said he. "What do you think of it,
     Watson?"


     "A masterpiece. You have never risen to a greater height."


     "I cannot agree with you there. From the moment that I conceived the
     idea of the body being upon the roof, which surely was not a very
     abstruse one, all the rest was inevitable. If it were not for the
     grave interests involved the affair up to this point would be
     insignificant. Our difficulties are still before us. But perhaps we
     may find something here which may help us."


     We had ascended the kitchen stair and entered the suite of rooms upon
     the first floor. One was a dining-room, severely furnished and
     containing nothing of interest. A second was a bedroom, which also
     drew blank. The remaining room appeared more promising, and my
     companion settled down to a systematic examination. It was littered
     with books and papers, and was evidently used as a study. Swiftly and
     methodically Holmes turned over the contents of drawer after drawer
     and cupboard after cupboard, but no gleam of success came to brighten
     his austere face. At the end of an hour he was no further than when
     he started.


     "The cunning dog has covered his tracks," said he. "He has left
     nothing to incriminate him. His dangerous correspondence has been
     destroyed or removed. This is our last chance."


     It was a small tin cash-box which stood upon the writing-desk. Holmes
     pried it open with his chisel. Several rolls of paper were within,
     covered with figures and calculations, without any note to show to
     what they referred. The recurring words, "water pressure" and
     "pressure to the square inch" suggested some possible relation to a
     submarine. Holmes tossed them all impatiently aside. There only
     remained an envelope with some small newspaper slips inside it. He
     shook them out on the table, and at once I saw by his eager face that
     his hopes had been raised.


     "What's this, Watson? Eh? What's this? Record of a series of messages
     in the advertisements of a paper. Daily Telegraph agony column by the
     print and paper. Right-hand top corner of a page. No dates--but
     messages arrange themselves. This must be the first:


     "Hoped to hear sooner. Terms agreed to. Write fully to address given
     on card.
     Pierrot.


     "Next comes:


     "Too complex for description. Must have full report, Stuff awaits you
     when goods delivered.
     Pierrot.


     "Then comes:


     "Matter presses. Must withdraw offer unless contract completed. Make
     appointment by letter. Will confirm by advertisement.
     Pierrot.


     "Finally:


     "Monday night after nine. Two taps. Only ourselves. Do not be so
     suspicious. Payment in hard cash when goods delivered.
     Pierrot.


     "A fairly complete record, Watson! If we could only get at the man at
     the other end!" He sat lost in thought, tapping his fingers on the
     table. Finally he sprang to his feet.


     "Well, perhaps it won't be so difficult, after all. There is nothing
     more to be done here, Watson. I think we might drive round to the
     offices of the Daily Telegraph, and so bring a good day's work to a
     conclusion."


     Mycroft Holmes and Lestrade had come round by appointment after
     breakfast next day and Sherlock Holmes had recounted to them our
     proceedings of the day before. The professional shook his head over
     our confessed burglary.


     "We can't do these things in the force, Mr. Holmes," said he. "No
     wonder you get results that are beyond us. But some of these days
     you'll go too far, and you'll find yourself and your friend in
     trouble."


     "For England, home and beauty--eh, Watson? Martyrs on the altar of
     our country. But what do you think of it, Mycroft?"


     "Excellent, Sherlock! Admirable! But what use will you make of it?"


     Holmes picked up the Daily Telegraph which lay upon the table.


     "Have you seen Pierrot's advertisement to-day?"


     "What? Another one?"


     "Yes, here it is:


     "To-night. Same hour. Same place. Two taps. Most vitally important.
     Your own safety at stake.
     Pierrot.


     "By George!" cried Lestrade. "If he answers that we've got him!"


     "That was my idea when I put it in. I think if you could both make it
     convenient to come with us about eight o'clock to Caulfield Gardens
     we might possibly get a little nearer to a solution."


     One of the most remarkable characteristics of Sherlock Holmes was his
     power of throwing his brain out of action and switching all his
     thoughts on to lighter things whenever he had convinced himself that
     he could no longer work to advantage. I remember that during the
     whole of that memorable day he lost himself in a monograph which he
     had undertaken upon the Polyphonic Motets of Lassus. For my own part
     I had none of this power of detachment, and the day, in consequence,
     appeared to be interminable. The great national importance of the
     issue, the suspense in high quarters, the direct nature of the
     experiment which we were trying--all combined to work upon my nerve.
     It was a relief to me when at last, after a light dinner, we set out
     upon our expedition. Lestrade and Mycroft met us by appointment at
     the outside of Gloucester Road Station. The area door of Oberstein's
     house had been left open the night before, and it was necessary for
     me, as Mycroft Holmes absolutely and indignantly declined to climb
     the railings, to pass in and open the hall door. By nine o'clock we
     were all seated in the study, waiting patently for our man.


     An hour passed and yet another. When eleven struck, the measured beat
     of the great church clock seemed to sound the dirge of our hopes.
     Lestrade and Mycroft were fidgeting in their seats and looking twice
     a minute at their watches. Holmes sat silent and composed, his
     eyelids half shut, but every sense on the alert. He raised his head
     with a sudden jerk.


     "He is coming," said he.


     There had been a furtive step past the door. Now it returned. We
     heard a shuffling sound outside, and then two sharp taps with the
     knocker. Holmes rose, motioning us to remain seated. The gas in the
     hall was a mere point of light. He opened the outer door, and then as
     a dark figure slipped past him he closed and fastened it. "This way!"
     we heard him say, and a moment later our man stood before us. Holmes
     had followed him closely, and as the man turned with a cry of
     surprise and alarm he caught him by the collar and threw him back
     into the room. Before our prisoner had recovered his balance the door
     was shut and Holmes standing with his back against it. The man glared
     round him, staggered, and fell senseless upon the floor. With the
     shock, his broad-brimmed hat flew from his head, his cravat slipped
     sown from his lips, and there were the long light beard and the soft,
     handsome delicate features of Colonel Valentine Walter.


     Holmes gave a whistle of surprise.


     "You can write me down an ass this time, Watson," said he. "This was
     not the bird that I was looking for."


     "Who is he?" asked Mycroft eagerly.


     "The younger brother of the late Sir James Walter, the head of the
     Submarine Department. Yes, yes; I see the fall of the cards. He is
     coming to. I think that you had best leave his examination to me."


     We had carried the prostrate body to the sofa. Now our prisoner sat
     up, looked round him with a horror-stricken face, and passed his hand
     over his forehead, like one who cannot believe his own senses.


     "What is this?" he asked. "I came here to visit Mr. Oberstein."


     "Everything is known, Colonel Walter," said Holmes. "How an English
     gentleman could behave in such a manner is beyond my comprehension.
     But your whole correspondence and relations with Oberstein are within
     our knowledge. So also are the circumstances connected with the death
     of young Cadogan West. Let me advise you to gain at least the small
     credit for repentance and confession, since there are still some
     details which we can only learn from your lips."


     The man groaned and sank his face in his hands. We waited, but he was
     silent.


     "I can assure you," said Holmes, "that every essential is already
     known. We know that you were pressed for money; that you took an
     impress of the keys which your brother held; and that you entered
     into a correspondence with Oberstein, who answered your letters
     through the advertisement columns of the Daily Telegraph. We are
     aware that you went down to the office in the fog on Monday night,
     but that you were seen and followed by young Cadogan West, who had
     probably some previous reason to suspect you. He saw your theft, but
     could not give the alarm, as it was just possible that you were
     taking the papers to your brother in London. Leaving all his private
     concerns, like the good citizen that he was, he followed you closely
     in the fog and kept at your heels until you reached this very house.
     There he intervened, and then it was, Colonel Walter, that to treason
     you added the more terrible crime of murder."


     "I did not! I did not! Before God I swear that I did not!" cried our
     wretched prisoner.


     "Tell us, then, how Cadogan West met his end before you laid him upon
     the roof of a railway carriage."


     "I will. I swear to you that I will. I did the rest. I confess it. It
     was just as you say. A Stock Exchange debt had to be paid. I needed
     the money badly. Oberstein offered me five thousand. It was to save
     myself from ruin. But as to murder, I am as innocent as you."


     "What happened, then?"


     "He had his suspicions before, and he followed me as you describe. I
     never knew it until I was at the very door. It was thick fog, and one
     could not see three yards. I had given two taps and Oberstein had
     come to the door. The young man rushed up and demanded to know what
     we were about to do with the papers. Oberstein had a short
     life-preserver. He always carried it with him. As West forced his way
     after us into the house Oberstein struck him on the head. The blow
     was a fatal one. He was dead within five minutes. There he lay in the
     hall, and we were at our wit's end what to do. Then Oberstein had
     this idea about the trains which halted under his back window. But
     first he examined the papers which I had brought. He said that three
     of them were essential, and that he must keep them. 'You cannot keep
     them,' said I. 'There will be a dreadful row at Woolwich if they are
     not returned.' 'I must keep them,' said he, 'for they are so
     technical that it is impossible in the time to make copies.' 'Then
     they must all go back together to-night,' said I. He thought for a
     little, and then he cried out that he had it. 'Three I will keep,'
     said he. 'The others we will stuff into the pocket of this young man.
     When he is found the whole business will assuredly be put to his
     account.' I could see no other way out of it, so we did as he
     suggested. We waited half an hour at the window before a train
     stopped. It was so thick that nothing could be seen, and we had no
     difficulty in lowering West's body on to the train. That was the end
     of the matter so far as I was concerned."


     "And your brother?"


     "He said nothing, but he had caught me once with his keys, and I
     think that he suspected. I read in his eyes that he suspected. As you
     know, he never held up his head again."


     There was silence in the room. It was broken by Mycroft Holmes.


     "Can you not make reparation? It would ease your conscience, and
     possibly your punishment."


     "What reparation can I make?"


     "Where is Oberstein with the papers?"


     "I do not know."


     "Did he give you no address?"


     "He said that letters to the HÃ´tel du Louvre, Paris, would eventually
     reach him."


     "Then reparation is still within your power," said Sherlock Holmes.


     "I will do anything I can. I owe this fellow no particular good-will.
     He has been my ruin and my downfall."


     "Here are paper and pen. Sit at this desk and write to my dictation.
     Direct the envelope to the address given. That is right. Now the
     letter:


     "Dear Sir:
     "With regard to our transaction, you will no doubt have observed by
     now that one essential detail is missing. I have a tracing which will
     make it complete. This has involved me in extra trouble, however, and
     I must ask you for a further advance of five hundred pounds. I will
     not trust it to the post, nor will I take anything but gold or notes.
     I would come to you abroad, but it would excite remark if I left the
     country at present. Therefore I shall expect to meet you in the
     smoking-room of the Charing Cross Hotel at noon on Saturday. Remember
     that only English notes, or gold, will be taken.


     "That will do very well. I shall be very much surprised if it does
     not fetch our man."


     And it did! It is a matter of history--that secret history of a
     nation which is often so much more intimate and interesting than its
     public chronicles--that Oberstein, eager to complete the coup of his
     lifetime, came to the lure and was safely engulfed for fifteen years
     in a British prison. In his trunk were found the invaluable
     Bruce-Partington plans, which he had put up for auction in all the
     naval centres of Europe.


     Colonel Walter died in prison towards the end of the second year of
     his sentence. As to Holmes, he returned refreshed to his monograph
     upon the Polyphonic Motets of Lassus, which has since been printed
     for private circulation, and is said by experts to be the last word
     upon the subject. Some weeks afterwards I learned incidentally that
     my friend spent a day at Windsor, whence be returned with a
     remarkably fine emerald tie-pin. When I asked him if he had bought
     it, he answered that it was a present from a certain gracious lady in
     whose interests he had once been fortunate enough to carry out a
     small commission. He said no more; but I fancy that I could guess at
     that lady's august name, and I have little doubt that the emerald pin
     will forever recall to my friend's memory the adventure of the
     Bruce-Partington plans.


















     ----------
     This text is provided to you "as-is" without any warranty. No
     warranties of any kind, expressed or implied, are made to you as to
     the text or any medium it may be on, including but not limited to
     warranties of merchantablity or fitness for a particular purpose.


     This text was formatted from various free ASCII and HTML variants.
     See http://sherlock-holm.es for an electronic form of this text and
     additional information about it.


     This text comes from the collection's version 3.1.